Dr. Aaronson is actively engaged in clinical practice and clinical research in the areas of heart failure, heart transplantation and mechanical circulatory support. His research has focused on improving health, quality of life and economic outcomes in these populations, utilizing methodologies ranging from small to large scale observational analyses, Markov modeling, meta-analyses, and both industry-sponsored and investigator-initiated randomized clinical trials of standard pharmaceutical interventions, alternative medicines, patient education and mechanical circulatory support. Dr. Aaronson has had a particular interest in modeling outcomes in advanced heart failure, heart transplantation and mechanical circulatory support to inform appropriate utilization of health resources. We are conducting a project to deploy Natural Language Processing to analyze clinicians' progress notes from Electronic Health Records and identify healthcare-related features that determine Failure To Rescue (Death after a major complication) among cardiac surgery patients. Another project that I would like to highlight is the project where we assessed the relationship between intraoperative surgeons' non-technical skills (situation awareness, decision-making, leadership, communication, and teamwork) and patient outcomes. During this project, we observed surgeons and used validated tools to measure their non-technical skills. We thereafter calculated the relationship between surgeons' non-technical skills and risk-adjusted complications. We found that higher surgeons' non-technical skills scores were associated with decreased mortality risk and reoperation. Our next steps include using ML/AI to develop objective measures to assess surgeons' non-technical skills from intraoperative audio and video recordings. I would like to contribute to the field of implementation science by deploying ML/AI to identify critical features determinants of successful implementation of evidence-based interventions to improve the quality of patient care. Dr. Abney has pursued research in natural language understanding and natural language learning, including information extraction, biomedical text processing, integrating text analysis into web search, robust and rapid partial parsing, stochastic grammars, spoken-language information systems, extraction of linguistic information from scanned page images, dependency-grammar induction for low-resource languages, and semisupervised learning. In this project, we use multi-scale models coupled with machine learning algorithms to study cardiac electromechanic coupling. The approach spans out the molecular, Brownian, and Langevin dynamics of the contractile (sarcomeric proteins) mechanism of cardiac cells and up-to-the finite element analysis of the tissue and organ levels. In this work, a novel surrogate machine learning algorithm for the sarcomere contraction is developed. The model is trained and established using in-silico data-driven dynamic sampling procedures implemented using our previously derived myofilament mathematical models. Multi-scale Machine Learning Modeling of Cardiac Electromechanics Coupling Mohamed Abouelenien’s areas of interest broadly cover data science topics, including applied machine learning, computer vision, and natural language processing. He established the Affective Computing and Multimodal Systems Lab (ACMS) which focuses on modeling human behavior and developing multimodal approaches for different applications. He has worked on a number of projects in these areas, including multimodal deception detection, multimodal sensing of drivers’ alertness levels and thermal discomfort, distraction detection, circadian rhythm modeling, emotion and stress analysis, automated scoring of students’ progression, sentiment analysis, ensemble learning, and image processing, among others. His research is funded by Ford Motor Company (Ford), Educational Testing Service (ETS), Toyota Research institute (TRI), and Procter &amp; Gamble (P&amp;G). Abouelenien has published in several top venues in IEEE, ACM, Springer, and SPIE. He also served as a reviewer for IEEE transactions and Elsevier journals and served as a program committee member for multiple international conferences. Dr. Joelle Abramowitz’s research examines the effects of different policies on individuals’ major life decisions and wellbeing including on health insurance and medical out-of-pocket expenditures as well as bigger picture effects on outcomes such as marriage, fertility, and work. She has worked intimately with a variety of datasets containing health insurance, demographic, employer, and administrative information, developing an expertise in the benefits, shortcomings, and intricacies of using and linking alternate datasets as well as a familiarity with the relevant literature, analytical approaches, and policy history in this line of research. In ongoing work, she applies this experience to enhancing Health and Retirement Study data through linkage with Census Bureau data on employers as part of the CenHRS project. This work includes considering how employer-sponsored health insurance offerings are changing in response to an aging workforce as well as changes in the employment arrangements of individuals nearing retirement. To this end, she considers how such changes affect a range of health- and economic-related outcomes, including physical and emotional wellbeing as well as economic security in retirement. I am an architect, educator, and creative practitioner/scholar/researcher. My work is focused on the intersections of materiality, technology, design, and construction, with an emphasis on adaptive reuse, equitable housing, and the socio-political and cultural aspects of digital architectural production and images. I write about digital materiality, software, and authorship. I am a principal of a collaborative architecture practice, called T+E+A+M, and a member of two interdisciplinary research collectives focused on equitable housing and ethical AI. Since 2023, I have served as the Director of U-M’s Digital Studies Institute, an interdisciplinary research and teaching unit focused on technology, digital culture, and social justice, primarily through the lenses of race, gender, disability, sexuality, class, power and identity. My work is at the intersection of data mining and human-computer interaction.  My research is focused on both modeling and the construction of new systems that leverage those models.  Current projects include mining large-scale social media systems (Twitter, Reddit), networks (e.g., academic citation graphs), text/networks (meme propagation, information extraction, news articles, political networks), and cross-cutting methods (link prediction, community detection).  Work on systems building includes new visualization systems (automated visualization, interactive machine learning, etc.), ranking systems (social feeds), and data-driven end-user support (end-user and developers). I am a pulmonary and critical care physician who is passionate about improving critical care delivery by applying advanced methods for causal inference to observational data. My prior work has leveraged real-world data clinical and administrative data to study the epidemiology of critical illness, the organization of critical care, and health care financing. My current work leverages real-world clinical data to understand whether and how care team fragmentation (transitions of physicians and other providers while a patient is still hospitalized) influences clinical outcomes like survival and recovery. Answering these questions correctly requires methods that are attentive to the complex causal structure underlying the relationship, depicted here. It features time-varying exposures (A), confounders (L), and mediators (M), all of which can influence clinical outcomes (Y). Arrows in the figure identify directional (i.e., causal) relationships between variables. My research focus is on the development and application of machine learning tools to large scale financial and unstructured (textual) data to extract, quantify and predict risk profiles and investment grade rating of private and public companies.  Example datasets include social media and financial aggregators such as Bloomberg, Pitchbook, and Privco. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. Dr. Aebersold’s professional and academic career is focused on advancing the science of learning applied in simulation to align clinician and student practice behaviors with research evidence to improve learner and health outcomes.  She focuses her scholarship in both high fidelity and virtual reality simulation and is a national leader and expert in simulation. Her scholarship has culminated in developing the Simulation Model to Improve Learner and Health Outcomes (SMILHO). Current Research Grants and Programs: Closing the loop: new data tools for measuring change in the quality for nursing education and the value of new approaches to instruction (PI) University of Michigan School of Nursing. Interactive anatomy-augmented virtual simulation training (PI with Voepel-Lewis) Archie MD Award Number 045889 Profile: Building a Better Nurse By Dan Meisler Communications Manager, ARC Michelle Aebersold has spent her career trying to “build a better nurse,” through training development, virtual clinical environments, and patient simulations. As Director of Simulation and Educational Innovation at the U-M School of Nursing, Aebersold is focused on creating realistic learning environments for nursing students. But it wasn’t until relatively recently that she realized she had an under-utilized but powerful tool at her disposal — data. For years, Aebersold has been collecting data on how student performance is affected by participation in various simulations, but it wasn’t until speaking to faculty from the Michigan Institute for Data Science (MIDAS) that she realized the potential insights all of her historical datasets might have hidden inside. “We’re trying to pull them all together to create a common thread, so that as we collect data on our students, we can follow them to say how they progressed. How many simulations and what type of simulations did they get and how did that impact their learning?” Aebersold said. “We hit students with a lot of simulations while they’re in school, but we don’t necessarily know which ones are better for certain things.” Now, as MIDAS core faculty member, Aebersold will be able to easily collaborate with other MIDAS researchers to refine and analyze her data. Eventually, she said, she’d like to be able to track nursing students as they enter their first jobs to see how their training translates to real-world performance. And a further goal for Aebersold is to help the practice of nursing education become similar to the training world-class athletes receive, in which, for example, subjects review videos of their performance to identify what works and what doesn’t. “We’re going to introduce some things, like what can we do with virtual simulations, or what can we do with eye-tracking,” she said. “We really want to try to dive deeper, by being able to put all this information together using a lot of these data science methods.” Aebersold has been at U-M since the mid-1980s, serving in a variety of clinical and administrative roles. She earned a Ph.D in Nursing from the University in 2008, and served as Director of the Clinical Learning Center in the School of Nursing for eight years thereafter. Since 2016, she’s been Director of Simulation and Educational Innovation. One of Aebersold’s recent projects, “Closing the Loop: New Data Tools for measuring Changes in the Quality of Nursing Education,” applies modern data-science tools to help understand the correlation between traditional tests and student skills and competence when they enter the workforce, and whether simulations coupled with debriefing sessions translate into improvements in skills and in test outcomes. Another potential project will focus on comparing the eye movements of novice nurses to expert nurses. Aebersold said initial findings have shown that nurses with more experience tend to focus their eyes on one thing for longer periods of time than those with less. She said she’s enlisting help on that work from professors in the School of Information at U-M. “By really understanding the difference between how experts do things and novices do things, you can help develop simulations that help novices get better,” Aebersold said. She credits her father with starting her on the path to becoming a nurse; he was a police officer, and would sometimes take her to the local emergency room. “I loved the fast pace,” she recalled, and the chance to have a real, positive impact on people’s lives. After earning a nursing degree from Madonna University, she became a critical care nurse. She then gravitated toward supervision and administration, gaining a masters in business administration, also from Madonna University. She earned her Ph.D. from U-M while working as a nurse manager at the U-M health System. She said all the technology, data, and innovative modes of study she’s brought together are all in service of one goal. “For me, it all comes down to how can we make the patient care environment safer for our patients,” she said. Prof. Agarwal’s is primarily interested in number theory, in particular in p-adic L-functions, Bloch-Kato conjecture and automorphic forms. His secondary research interests are polynomials, geometry and math education, Machine Learning, and healthcare analytics. The Aguilar group is focused understanding transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms of skeletal muscle stem cells in diverse contexts such as regeneration after injury and aging. We focus on this area because there are little to no therapies for skeletal muscle after injury or aging. We use various types of in-vivo and in-vitro models in combination with genomic assays and high-throughput sequencing to study these molecular mechanisms. Accomplishments and Awards The Role of Maresin 1 in Muscle Regeneration: A New Discovery in Biomedical Research The Ahmed lab studies behavioral neural circuits and attempts to repair them when they go awry in neurological disorders. Working with patients and with transgenic rodent models, we focus on how space, time and speed are encoded by the spatial navigation and memory circuits of the brain. We also focus on how these same circuits go wrong in Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and epilepsy. Our research involves the collection of massive volumes of neural data. Within these terabytes of data, we work to identify and understand irregular activity patterns at the sub-millisecond level. This requires us to leverage high performance computing environments, and to design custom algorithmic and analytical signal processing solutions. As part of our research, we also discover new ways for the brain to encode information (how neurons encode sequences of space and time, for example) – and the algorithms utilized by these natural neural networks can have important implications for the design of more effective artificial neural networks. My core research expertise involves developing and employing a wide array of computational methods to discover, design, and characterize materials and systems that address critical challenges in energy and the environment. These methods span from stochastic techniques to molecular dynamics, density functional theory, quantum chemistry, and data science. Beyond contributing fundamental design principles for high-performing materials, my research has led to the discovery of record-breaking materials for hydrogen storage, natural gas storage, and thermal energy storage, alongside creating open-access databases, machine learning models, and Python APIs. In data science, I have uniquely contributed to feature engineering, compressed sensing, classical machine learning algorithms, symbolic regression, and interpretable ML. My approach to feature engineering involves crafting or identifying a concise set of meaningful features for developing interpretable machine learning models, diverging from traditional data reduction techniques that often disregard the underlying physics. Moreover, I have enabled the use of compressed sensing-based algorithms for developing symbolic regressions for large datasets, utilizing statistical sampling and high-throughput computing. I’ve also integrated symbolic regression and constrained optimization methods for the inverse design of materials/systems to meet specific performance metrics, and I continue to merge machine learning with fundamental physical laws to demystify material stability and instability under industrial conditions. Looking forward, my ongoing and future projects include employing machine learning for causal inference in healthcare to understand and predict outcomes and integrating AI to conduct comprehensive environmental and social impact analyses of materials/systems via life cycle analysis. Furthermore, I am exploring quantum computing and machine learning to drive innovation and transform vehicle energy systems and manufacturing processes. Hyun-soo Ahn is an Associate Professor of Operations and Management Science at the Michigan Business School. He joined Michigan in 2003 from the department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research at UC Berkeley. In his research, Hyun-soo develops and analyzes mathematical models related to supply chain management, dynamic pricing and revenue management, workforce agility, and resource allocation. He is also interested in modeling the customer’s behavior (such as subscription) and how it affects the firm’s profit. He has worked with more than 20 companies and his research has been funded by several organizations including National Science Foundation. His papers appear in leading journals in the field, including Operations Research, M&SOM, and Journal of Applied Probability. At Ross, he teaches supply chain analytics and business statistics to MBAs, Exec. MBAs, MSCM, and BBAs. He has won a number of teaching awards voted by students, including 2012 Exec MBA teaching excellence award, 2012 Global MBA teaching excellence award, and 2006 BBA teaching excellence award. The Aidala group focuses on experimental studies of high-energy quantum chromodynamics (QCD), the theory of the strong nuclear interaction, working at the intersection of nuclear and particle physics. They work with petabyte-scale data sets and extensive global networks of distributed computing systems to study proton-proton and proton-nucleus collision data. Their data analysis techniques include machine learning and a variety of statistical methods. The data are produced at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European Centre for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva, Switzerland, and the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) in New York. Specifically, the Aidala group is part of two large, international collaborations involving hundreds of scientists: the LHC-beauty (LHCb) experiment at the LHC and the sPHENIX experiment at RHIC. The group is furthermore working toward the future Electron-Ion Collider, a next-generation facility focused on the study of QCD that is planned to start taking data at BNL in the early 2030s. Comprehensive investigations of solar, interplanetary, and Earth’s Magnetospheric systems utilizing state-of-the-art in-situ observations and global simulations. The research topics of interest involve critical open science questions, including solar coronal heating, solar wind acceleration and heating processes, magnetospheric dynamics, and space weather predictions. The research tools include statistical data analyses to generate physics-based models. Accomplishments and Awards U of M resea rchers to guide students nationwide in gathering data during Monday’s solar eclipse Lunar gold rush: Uncovering the Moon’s hidden treasures UM Researchers on the hunt for Space Litter My focus is on personalized, collaborative and distributed data analytics, where knowledge from diverse data sources is effectively integrated. This approach allows sources to retain personalized models tailored to their unique features, distribute or decentralize model inference, and protect personal data when needed. Currently, my research aims to answer three questions: Descriptive : How to extract what is shared and unique across datasets? Predictive : How can multiple entities (such as hospitals or IoT devices) collaboratively improve the predictive power of their models while keeping their personal data private? Prescriptive : How to fast-track and improve optimal design by effectively distributing trial & error efforts across collaborating entities? Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Coordinated Multi-building Modeling and Management for Flexible Grid Service Innovation New statistical tool to distinguish shared and unique features in data from different sources Alzheimer’s disease (AD) afflicts more than 5 million people in the United States and is gaining widespread attention. Over 400 clinical trials were run between 2002 and 2012, but only one trial has resulted in a marketable product. One of the most common explanations for these failures is likely the consideration of Alzheimer’s as a homogeneous disease. In many cases, individuals within the same group respond to a drug in different ways. Given the highly complex nature of AD, the likelihood of identifying a single drug to provide meaningful benefits to every patient is minimal. There is a pressing and unmet need to develop personalized treatment plans based on each patients’ omics profiles. To solve this problem, my research focus is to develop a data-driven computational approach to predict drug responses for individuals with AD. This approach is based on the patients’ metabolomics and transcriptomics profile and publicly available drug databases. Transcriptomics and metabolomics are increasingly being used to corroborate our interpretation of the pathophysiological pathways underlying AD. Integration of metabolomics and transcriptomics will guide the development of precision medicine for AD. In particular, I used the metabolome and transcriptome profiles of Alzheimer’s patients from ADNI database. For each patient, I identify his/her dysregulated pathways from their metabolome profiles and his/her specific gene regulatory network from their transcriptome profiles. My preliminary data suggested that each patient with Alzheimer’s has distinct dysregulated pathways and gene regulatory network. Drug selection based on a patient’s specific metabolome and transcriptome profiles offers a tremendous opportunity for more targeted and effective disease treatment and it represents a critical innovation towards personalized medicine for AD. My long-term goal is to become an independent investigator in computational biology with a focus on translating omics data to bedside application. The overall objective of my research is to combine metabolomics and gene expression data with drug data using advanced machine learning algorithms to personalize medicine for AD. I develop and use optimization algorithms (Newton-based, gradient-based, and genetic algorithms) to understand problems in fluid and solid mechanics with applications to biology. Examples of optimally efficient snake locomotion J. Trent Alexander is the Associate Director and a Research Professor at ICPSR in the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan. Alexander is a historical demographer and builds social science data infrastructure. He is currently leading the Decennial Census Digitization and Linkage Project (joint with Raj Chetty and Katie Genadek) and ResearchDataGov (joint with Lynette Hoelter). Prior to coming to ICPSR in 2017, Alexander initiated the Census Longitudinal Infrastructure Project at the Census Bureau and managed the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) at the University of Minnesota. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Images to Integrated Data: Piloting new methods to digitize, parse, and link historical records Amal Alhosban, is an Associate Professor of Computer Science at the University of Michigan Flint campus. She received her Ph.D. in Computer Science at Wayne State University in 2013. Her research focuses on Semantic Web and Fault Management and Wireless Network. My research is focussed on nuclear energy systems and public policy. My research has included data analysis to predict equipment failures and materials degradation. My goal as an ecologist is to apply ecological theory to help solve real-world conservation issues. Specifically, I seek to identify the mechanisms by which behavioral, population, and community dynamics mediate nutrient and energy pathways. The objective is to improve our ability to predict ecological outcomes, and enhance conservation efficacy such as the sustainability of ecosystem services (e.g., fisheries). Much of this research takes place in tropical coastal ecosystems (mangroves, seagrass beds, and coral reefs) where I study gradients created by anthropogenic impacts to test theory directly within the context of environmental change and biodiversity loss. My research is broad and multifaceted, and includes a combination of extensive field-based research and computational analyses.The type of data we collect in the field has endless potential to be better understood through collaborations with MIDAS. I rely on (and very much enjoy) integrative collaborations across a variety of fields. What are some of your most interesting projects? We have recently generated one of the most extensive high-resolution dataset of fish movement in any system that we are aware of. We are using these data to understand the role of consumers in moving nutrient and energy through these ecosystems, and also to better understand the relative ecological importance of individual-level vs species-level variation. What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? I would like to improve our ability to predict fish production in tropical coastal ecosystems to improve food security. I would also like to help improve our ability to manage seagrass ecosystems to maximize carbon sequestration and storage. What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? A central goal of my lab is to collect extremely high-end and extensive empirical data such that it can inform models that help us forecast ecological processes at the scales of entire ecosystems. We are currently using a suite of techniques to do so, including the use of individual-based modeling in particular. The type of data we are generating is absolutely ripe for being used with high-power data science and AI research. I honestly believe the applications are endless and would be extremely excited to team up with folks to build on these exciting possibilities. What are some interesting facts about yourself? Backpacking and woodworking are how I unwind. I love being outside, and I love doing field work. Studying our artificial reefs in Haiti Mark Allison, PhD, is Associate Professor of Computer Science in the department of Computer Science, Engineering and Physics at the University of Michigan-Flint. Dr. Allison’s research pertains to the autonomic control of complex cyberphysical systems utilizing software models as first class artifacts. Domains being explored are microgrid energy management and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in swarms. Daniel Almirall, Ph.D., is Assistant Professor in the Survey Research Center and Faculty Associate in the Population Studies Center in the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan. Prof. Almirall’s current methodological research interests lie in the broad area of causal inference. He is particularly interested in methods for causal inference using longitudinal data sets in which treatments, covariates, and outcomes are all time-varying. He is also interested in developing statistical methods that can be used to form adaptive interventions, sometimes known as dynamic treatment regimes. An adaptive intervention is a sequence of individually tailored decisions rules that specify whether, how, and when to alter the intensity, type, or delivery of treatment at critical decision points in the medical care process. Adaptive interventions are particularly well-suited for the management of chronic diseases, but can be used in any clinical setting in which sequential medical decision making is essential for the welfare of the patient. They hold the promise of enhancing clinical practice by flexibly tailoring treatments to patients when they need it most, and in the most appropriate dose, thereby improving the efficacy and effectiveness of treatment. Study Design Interests : In addition to developing new statistical methodologies, Prof. Almirall devotes a portion of his research to the design of sequential multiple assignment randomized trials (SMARTs). SMARTs are randomized trial designs that give rise to high-quality data that can be used to develop and optimize adaptive interventions. Substantive Interests : As an investigator and methodologist in the Institute for Social Research, Prof. Almirall takes part in research in a wide variety of areas of social science and treatment (or interventions) research. He is particularly interested in the substantive areas of mental health (depression, anxiety) and substance abuse, especially as related to children and adolescents. My research focuses on how environmental change, including climate, invasion and habitat destruction influences freshwater ecological communities across space and time. I am involved in a collaborative interdisciplinary project funded by a MIDAS Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant: CHANGES: Collections, Heterogeneous data, And Next Generation Ecological Studies.We are developing protocols for integrating heterogeneous natural science datasets to investigate the impacts of environmental changes on species. Our project focuses on climate change impacts on inland lake fish communities across Michigan, drawing on more than a century’s worth of data and specimens archived at the University of Michigan Museum of Zoology (UMMZ) and the Institute for Fisheries Research (IFR), which is a cooperative unit of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Fisheries Division and the University of Michigan. Alter’s research integrates theory and methods from demography, economics, and family history with historical sources to understand demographic behaviors in the past.  From 2007 to 2016 Alter was Director of the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, the world’s largest archive of social science data.  He has been active in international efforts to promote research transparency, data sharing, and secure access to confidential research data.  He is currently engaged in projects to automate the capture of metadata from statistical analysis software and to compare fertility transitions in contemporary and historical populations. I lead Robot Studio, a Research lab in the Robotics Department of the University of Michigan. Our work is focused on democratizing health and arts with social robots. We develop human-centered robot systems that enhance the quality of life and that promotes creativity. Our lab is interdisciplinary, composed of researchers from computer science, engineering, information science, psychology, design, architecture, and the arts. Reza Amini is currently an Assistant Research Scientist at the Department of Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering (NAME), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Real-Time Adaptive Control Engineering (RACE) Lab at the University of Michigan from June 2017 to January 2019. He received his Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from Michigan Technological University, Houghton, in 2017, where he served as a graduate research and teaching assistant at Energy Mechatronics Lab (2013-2017). Reza is an active member of IEEE Control Systems Society (CSS) and ASME Dynamic Systems and Control (DSC) Division. He is the author of over 20 peer-reviewed journal and conference papers in the broader area of control, optimization, automotive and transportation, and robotic systems. He has served as associate editor, (co-)chair, and (co-)organizer at several international conferences, including the American Control Conference (ACC), IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Applications (CCTA), and ASME Dynamic Systems and Control Conference (DSCC). He is also an SAE member (since 2014), ASME member (since 2015), and IEEE member (since 2017). See here for more information. Accomplishments and Awards Predicting mechanical properties of 3D printed nanocomposites using multi-scale modeling I use mixed methods to investigate social media’s use and roles in relation to self-disclosure, social support exchange, and other disclosure behavior outcomes and responses to them. I concentrate on experiences that can be distressing, traumatizing, isolating, or stigmatized, and contribute to poor wellbeing. Broadly, in these contexts, I address how we can design social computing systems that facilitate beneficial sensitive disclosures and desired disclosure outcomes such as (but not limited to) exchanging social support, meaningful interactions, reciprocal disclosures, and reduced stigma. Some contexts my work has focused on in the past include: mental health, sexual abuse, and pregnancy loss. The research trajectory described above focuses on other social media users as information/disclosure recipients. I also investigate people’s attitudes and concerns when companies and algorithms are audiences or recipients of one’s sensitive information. This work goes beyond social media applications to include other types of social technologies. I critically examine the ways emerging technologies such as emotion artificial intelligence may engage with humans in times of distress or in otherwise private and personal settings. I explore the extent to which designing these technologies is appropriate in different contexts, and investigate what it would take for them to be sensitive to and foreground people’s values, needs, and desires. Accomplishment and Awards Emotion-tracking AI on the job: Workers fear being watched – and misunderstood I build data science tools to address challenges in medicine and clinical care. Specifically, I apply signal processing, image processing and machine learning techniques, including deep convolutional and recurrent neural networks and natural language processing, to aid diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of patients with acute and chronic conditions. In addition, I conduct research on novel approaches to represent clinical data and combine supervised and unsupervised methods to improve model performance and reduce the labeling burden. Another active area of my research is design, implementation and utilization of novel wearable devices for non-invasive patient monitoring in hospital and at home. This includes integration of the information that is measured by wearables with the data available in the electronic health records, including medical codes, waveforms and images, among others. Another area of my research involves linear, non-linear and discrete optimization and queuing theory to build new solutions for healthcare logistic planning, including stochastic approximation methods to model complex systems such as dispatch policies for emergency systems with multi-server dispatches, variable server load, multiple priority levels, etc. The Athey Lab in the Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics (DCM&B) University of Michigan Medical School, is led by Dr. Brian Athey (see Atheylab.ccmb.med.umich.edu ). The lab is working on two complementary domains of research and development. 1. The Athey Lab’s recent research interests are in the creation and use of bioinformatics pipelines and machine learning methods to radically improve the efficacy of psychiatric pharmacogenomics—allowing patients to take the most effective drug for their illness and suffer the fewest side effects. This area of research centers on the exploration of the ‘pharmacoepigenome’ in psychiatry, neurology, anesthesia and addiction medicine. This research employs high-throughput 4D microscopic imaging of enhancers, promoters and chromatin features, using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). These methods are coupled with Hi-C chromatin conformation capture, chromatin state annotation, localization in postmortem human brain tissue and induced neuronal pluripotent stem cells, and machine learning for identification of regulatory variants, to provide insight into the genetic and epigenetic mechanisms of inter-individual and inter-cohort differences in psychotropic drug response 2. The Athey Lab is also developing new high-throughput methods to analyze images of genes in the context of the cellular nucleus to better understand the machinery of bioinformatics in context. One main area of research is the application of high resolution fluorescence optical microscopy coupled with high-throughput analysis, 3D imaging and machine learning to explore the chromatin structure and nuclear architecture of cells. This research emphasizes the convergence between 3D structural predictions and 3D structural measurements with microscopy, to provide insight into the transcriptional architecture of the interphase nucleus. This area of research centers on the exploration of the ‘pharmacoepigenome’ in psychiatry, neurology, anesthesia and addiction medicine. This research employs high-throughput 4D microscopic imaging of enhancers, promoters and chromatin features, using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). These methods are coupled with Hi-C chromatin conformation capture, chromatin state annotation, localization in postmortem human brain tissue and induced neuronal pluripotent stem cells, and machine learning for identification of regulatory variants, to provide insight into the genetic and epigenetic mechanisms of inter-individual and inter-cohort differences in psychotropic drug response. Collaborations: The lab works very closely with Assurex Health, Inc. (Mason, Ohio) on project 1. This work is governed by a Regents-approved Master Agreement between U-M and Assurex Health, Inc. Similarly, the lab collaborates closely with the tranSMART Foundation (tF), and this is also governed by a Master Agreement between U-M and tF. The lab collaborates with the Brady Urological Institute at Johns Hopkins Medical School, lead by Dr. Ken Pienta, to build on their extensive 2D characterization of prostate tumors, by the introduction of simple chromatin dyes, advanced biomarkers, and 3D imaging systems. The lab works closely with Dr. John Wiley of University of Michigan Health System, studying the effect of glucocorticoids on the neuroblastoma based cell line Sy5y before and after treatment with retinoic acid and BDNF, particularly in their terminally differentiated condition. The lab also collaborates with Dr. Christoph Cremer from the Institute of Molecular Biology in Mainz, Germany, investigating super-resolution microscopy techniques. Lithium response network in human brain in bipolar disorder: A regulatory network in human brain mediating lithium response in bipolar patients was revealed by analysis of functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and published gene association studies, followed by epigenome mapping. Noncoding SNPs characterized as altering enhancer and promoter function were imputed using fine epigenetic mapping, followed by bioinformatics analysis. Following gene set enrichment and pathway analysis, these genes were found to be significantly associated (p < 10-27; Fisher’s exact test) with this ionotropic AMPA2 glutamate receptor network in human brain67. Higgins GA, Allyn-Feuer A,Barbour E and Athey BD. “A glutamatergic network mediates lithium response in bipolar disorder as defined by epigenome pathway analysis.” Accepted, Journal of Pharmacogenomics. August 2015. Prof. Avestruz is a computational cosmologist leading the ALCCA (Avestruz Lab for Computational Cosmology and Astrophysics) research group. Her research group uses simulations to model, predict, and interpret observed large-scale cosmic structures. Her primary focus is to understand the evolution of galaxy clusters. These are the most massive gravitationally collapsed structures in our universe, comprised of hundreds to thousands of galaxies. Other aspects of her work prepare for the next decade of observations, which will produce unprecedented volumes of data. With the Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time, Avestruz’ group is leading software development efforts within the Dark Energy Science Collaboration including applications of machine learning in cosmology. Dr. Axinn is a Professor of survey research, population studies, sociology, and public policy at the University of Michigan. Axinn is a social demographer studying community, intergenerational, and social psychological influences on marriage, childbearing, reproductive health, mental health, and the natural environment. He is the former director of Michigan’s Survey Research Center, which has an active program of methodological research on longitudinal studies, survey data collection, and mixed-method studies. He is the director of the Chitwan Valley Family Study (CVFS), a 30-year, mixed-method longitudinal study in Nepal. He also currently serves as the principal investigator of the U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics Transition into Adulthood Supplement (PSID-TAS) 2025 and a co-investigator on the team leading the American Family Health Study (AFHS). He is the MPI of an NIMH R01 study (R01MH110872), which utilized diagnostic interviews to assess mental disorders in over 10,700 members of the CVFS and collected their DNA. This study employed several innovative data collection tools that he developed, including mixed-mode, multi-device tools for tracking respondents over time and using Life History Calendars to enhance the measurement of mental disorder symptoms. The measurement of mental health embedded in this whole-family longitudinal study has supported a wide range of analytic advances, including the estimation of age-specific mental health differences in long-term consequences of exposure to armed conflict, discovery of community-level social support programs that reduce the prevalence of major depressive disorder, and long-term intergenerational consequences of parental mental disorders. Within Data Science and AI, he is excited about developing innovative tools to assist scientists in minimizing the consequences of total survey errors when estimating causal models using longitudinal data. This work will advance the understanding of the discrepancies that result from differences in question-wording, order, response options, mode of interview, and respondents’ characteristics (such as native languages) across multiple surveys of the same or closely related topics. This research has high potential to guide a new generation of data collection methods that support scientists in making causal inferences. The most significant scientific contribution he would like to make is in helping the next generation of scientists use innovative data collection methods to advance answers to high-priority research questions. My research interests lie in design and analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs), partial identification, identification and inference with multi-valued treatments and instruments, and quantile regression. In one recent paper I study the optimal stratified randomization procedure in RCTs, and found a certain kind of matched-pair design is optimal. In another paper (coauthored with Joe Romano and Azeem Shaikh), we provide asymptotically exact inference procedure for matched-pair designs. In another paper we study inference with moment inequalities whose dimension grows exponentially fast with the sample size. I also have a paper in which we study the sharp identified sets for various treatment effects with multi-valued instruments and multi-values treatments. Dr. Veera Baladandayuthapani is currently a Professor in the Department of Biostatistics at University of Michigan (UM), where he is also the Associate Director of the Center for Cancer Biostatistics. He joined UM in Fall 2018 after spending 13 years in the Department of Biostatistics at University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, where was a Professor and Institute Faculty Scholar and held adjunct appointments at Rice University, Texas A&M University and UT School of Public Health. His research interests are mainly in high-dimensional data modeling and Bayesian inference. This includes functional data analyses, Bayesian graphical models, Bayesian semi-/non-parametric models and Bayesian machine learning. These methods are motivated by large and complex datasets (a.k.a. Big Data) such as high-throughput genomics, epigenomics, transcriptomics and proteomics as well as high-resolution neuro- and cancer- imaging. His work has been published in top statistical/biostatistical/bioinformatics and biomedical/oncology journals. He has also co-authored a book on Bayesian analysis of gene expression data. He currently holds multiple PI-level grants from NIH and NSF to develop innovative and advanced biostatistical and bioinformatics methods for big datasets in oncology. He has also served as the Director of the Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Cores for the Specialized Programs of Research Excellence (SPOREs) in Multiple Myeloma and Lung Cancer and Biostatistics&Bioinformatics platform leader for the Myeloma and Melanoma Moonshot Programs at MD Anderson. He is a fellow of the American Statistical Association and an elected member of the International Statistical Institute. He currently serves as an Associate Editor for Journal of American Statistical Association, Biometrics and Sankhya. An example of horizontal (across cancers) and vertical (across multiple molecular platforms) data integration. Image from Ha et al (Nature Scientific Reports, 2018; https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-018-32682-x) I am interested in the basic mechanisms of protein quality control systems at cellular membranes. I study how these systems select their substrates and aim to identify the cellular pathways regulated by them. These processes are important in pathologies related to cell stress, protein misfolding, and protein misregulation. Human illnesses linked to these problems include Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, and various cancers. My longer-term goal is to understand how changing conditions in cells target substrate proteins to these integral-membrane quality control systems. Some of the questions that keep me up at night relate to the Endoplasmic Reticulum Associated Degradation (ERAD) system: How does ERAD recognize substrate proteins? What features of proteins make them substrates for selection? What role does the membrane play in the function of ERAD? What unknown proteins/pathways could be regulated by these systems? I am interested in setting up novel assays and using screening approaches to address these questions comprehensively. Insights from my approaches should allow screening for, and refinement of, therapeutics with value in a wide range of pathologies. Professor Balzano and her students investigate problems in statistical signal processing, machine learning, and optimization, particularly dealing with large and messy data. Her applications typically have missing, corrupted, and uncalibrated data as well as heterogeneous data in terms of sensors, sensor quality, and scale in both time and space. Her theoretical interests involve classes of non-convex matrix factorization problems, such as PCA and many interesting variants such as sparse or structured principal components, orthogonality and non-negativity constraints, nonlinear variants such as low-dimensional algebraic variety models, heteroscedastic data, and even categorical data or human preference data. She concentrates on fast gradient methods and related optimization methods that are scalable to real-time operation and massive data. Her work provides algorithmic and statistical guarantees for these algorithms on the aforementioned non-convex problems, and she focuses carefully on assumptions that are realistic for the relevant application areas in sensor networks, power systems, control, and computer vision. Moulinath Banerjee, PhD, is Professor of Statistics, College of Literature, Science, and the Arts, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Moulinath Banerjee was born and raised in India where he completed both his Bachelors and Masters in Statistics at the Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata. He obtained his Ph.D. from the Statistics department at University of Washington, Seattle, in December 2000, served as lecturer there for Winter and Spring quarters, 2001, and joined University of Michigan in Fall 2001. Mouli’s research interests are in the fields of non-standard asymptotics, empirical process theory, threshold and boundary estimation, and graphical networks. His main contributions to date are in the areas of inference under shape-restrictions, especially monotone functions, and inference in the setting of designed multistage procedures. Mouli is the recipient of the 2011 IISA Young Investigators Award and an elected fellow of ISI. He has a broad range of interests outside of statistics which include classical music, literature, history, philosophy, physics and ancestral genetics. He is, also, most emphatically, a gourmet and believes that a life without good food is a life less lived. My research is primarily focused around 1) machine learning methods for understanding healthcare delivery and outcomes in the population, 2) analyses of correlated data (e.g. longitudinal and clustered data), and 3) survival analysis and competing risks analyses. We have developed tree-based and ensemble regression methods for censored and multilevel data, combination classifiers using different types of learning methods, and methodology to identify representative trees from an ensemble. These methods have been applied to important areas of biomedicine, specifically in patient prognostication, in developing clinical decision-making tools, and in identifying complex interactions between patient, provider, and health systems for understanding variations in healthcare utilization and delivery. My substantive areas of research are cancer and pediatric cardiovascular disease. Sy Banerjee studies the impact of mobile devices on consumer behavior and on the processing of signals emerging from location-based Social Media posts. He teaches a MBA class on digital marketing and Big Data and collaborates with researchers from Business, GIS and Computer Science. Some of his recent works include: Assessing Prime-Time for Geotargeting With Mobile Big Data, Sy Banerjee, Vijay Viswanathan, Kalyan Raman, Hao Ying, Journal of Marketing Analytics, 2013, Vol. 1(3), pp 174-183. “Visualizing active travel sentiment in an urban context” with Greg Rybarczyk, International Conference on Transport & Health MINETA Transportation Institute, San Jose, California, July 2016. “Assigning Geo-Relevance of Sentiments Mined from Location-Based Social Media Posts” with R. Sanborn and M. Farmer, in Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis XIV, LNCS “Understanding In-Store Consumer Experiences via User Generated Content from Social Media”, working paper with Karthik Sridhar and Ashwin Aravindakshan “Tweeted Customer Emotions as Currency for Competitive Performance: A Framework of Location-Based Social Media Listening”, working paper with Amit Poddar, Karthik Sridhar, Nanda Kumar 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award : Detecting Early-Warning Signals of Market Share Loss from Locus of Customer Movements My research focuses on methods, applications, and ethics of Computational Modeling in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI). Understanding and modeling human behavior supports innovative information technology that will change how we study and design interactive user experiences. I envision modeling the human accurately across domains as a theoretical foundation for work in HCI in which computational models provide a foundation to study, describe, and understand complex human behaviors and support optimization and evaluation of user interfaces. I create technology that automatically reasons about and acts in response to people’s behavior to help them be productive, healthy, and safe. Accomplishments and Awards AI guardrails can fall short in health care: study 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Detecting and Countering Untrustworthy Artificial Intelligence (AI) through AI Literacy In the area of multi-scale modeling of manufacturing processes: (a) Models for understanding the mechanisms of forming and joining of lightweight materials. This new understanding enables the development of advanced processes which remove limitations of current state-of-the-art capabilities that exhibit limited formability of high strength lightweight alloys, and limited reproducibility of joining quality; (b) Innovative multi-scale finite element models for ultrasonic welding of battery tabs (resulting in models adopted by GM for designing and manufacturing batteries for the Chevy Volt), and multi-scale models for ultrasonic welding of short carbon fiber composites (resulting in models adopted by GM for designing and manufacturing assemblies made of carbon fiber composites with metallic parts); (c) Data-driven algorithms of prediction geometrical and microstructural integrity of the incremental formed parts. Machine learning is used for developing fast and robust methods to be integrated into the designing process and replace finite element simulations. My research interests are to improve safety associated with motor-vehicle transportation by addressing both active safety (increased crash avoidance) and passive safety (increased crash protection) issues through the development and application of a wide range of research methodologies. These methodologies are targeted at developing a better understanding and modeling of driver behavior, including physical and cognitive attributes, driver decision-making processes and human intention prediction. I am currently interested in applying data science to study the following topics: *Driver state detection and prediction; *Improve user intersection with automated vehicle technologies; *Communication and interaction between vehicle and vulnerable road users *Driving style classification *Human factors issues associated with connected and automated vehicle technologies Where do drivers look when they are not paying attention to the road Dr. Barnes is a cardiologist and health services researcher who is passionate about improving care for patients with thrombotic conditions using innovative tools within the electronic health record. He uses user-centered design principles to develop clinical decision support and population health tools that support clinicians in making evidence-based decisions. Dr. Barnes partners closely with data scientists to leverage machine learning methods to enhance the implementation and usability of various tools with the electronic health record. For one project, his team developed a population management tool within the electronic health record to identify all patients using oral anticoagulant medication and to flag those whose prescription did not follow the FDA package label instructions. This tool, called the DOAC Dashboard, has now been implemented in five health systems nationally and has dramatically reduced off-label prescribing rates. Concurrently, he evaluated a similar tool within the Veterans Health Administration system and showed that use of their DOAC Dashboard was associated with a reduction in both off-label prescribing and a reduction in stroke and other thrombotic complications. For another project, his team developed a series of medication alerts within the electronic health record that appear at the time a clinician prescribes an off-label oral anticoagulant. We developed a system for real-time randomization so that we could compare the two different alerts to see which was most effective at achieving a change in the prescription. He started his research journey as a medical student, exploring the basics of anticoagulant prescribing. In medical school, he helped to write a grant application to Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan that would fund a multi-site quality collaborative focused on anticoagulation care. As a faculty member here at the University of Michigan, he partnered with Dr. Michael Lanham, an informaticist, to develop the DOAC Dashboard and implement it in five different health systems. he works closely with colleagues from the Medical School and School of Public Health to implement best practices in clinical care with a focus on innovative uses of the electronic health record to guide clinician behavior change. In medicine, there is an overwhelming volume of data. No single person can keep up with the rapidly growing literature or the volume of data that is collected for individual patients. AI has the potential to rapidly summarize the literature and bring actionable data to the fingertips of clinicians in a way that guides them to make appropriate and safe decisions for their patients. Realizing this potential is what excites him most about data science and AI research in healthcare. Early warning systems (EWS) that predict patient outcomes for therapeutic interventions are increasingly being used to make clinical decisions. Predicted events often include outcomes such as unplanned ICU transfer, cardiac arrest, or death. The goal of these models is to provide a timely alert to clinicians so they can intervene and prevent these outcomes from occurring. However, it is difficult to evaluate the performance of an EWS after it has been deployed. For example, if the model correctly predicts a deterioration event, the clinician may take actions to prevent the patient’s predicted deterioration. If the clinician’s actions are successful, the deterioration is averted and the label against which the model is tested will become negative. This is despite the fact that the model’s positive prediction was correct. Without the context of the clinician intervention, the model will be evaluated as if it was wrong. Overall, the better the model is at improving outcomes, the worse the performance is going to appear. This is known as confounding medical interventions (CMI). In this project, we evaluated two causal inference frameworks for estimating model performance metrics such as sensitivity and PPV in the presence of CMI. To our knowledge, no other methods exist for estimating the performance of a model in the context of confounding medical interventions. I started doing research at the Medical College of Wisconsin while getting my Master's in Bioinformatics focusing on identifying genomic loci associated with diabetic traits in rats. I was really excited to be a part of a great group of people figuring out an interesting and complex problem. I continued doing genomics research throughout my Ph.D. at Marquette University and post-doc at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The majority of my work as a post-doc focused on understanding genetic variation in the context of the 3D genome. The spatial organization of the genome is such an important component of gene regulation, but at the time was previously understudied. I was involved in a number of collaborations involving this, and it was awesome being able to work with such crucial datasets (and it was A LOT of data). Coming to Michigan Medicine and working more on clinical problems rather than genomics has been a bit of a shift, but I have been able to apply all the research skills I gained over the last 10 years and continue to be excited by new and interesting data science problems. I think the most exciting thing about data science and AI research is not only using models for prediction but also what features drive the prediction. I also appreciate the increased focus on addressing potential bias in AI and making models more equitable and fairer. I am a big fan of looking "underneath the hood" and I am excited that more people are going beyond simply looking at overall performance. The picture is often much more complex and there are many nuances and potential pitfalls. However, addressing them is part of the process and can lead to increased public trust and model accuracy and usage. I run 800-1,200 miles total every year, but not I'm not at all fast. I have two Shiba Inus named after food (Marzipan and Soba). My main research interest is in the old-fashioned goal of Artificial Intelligence (AI), that of building autonomous agents that can learn to be broadly competent in complex, dynamic, and uncertain environments. The field of reinforcement learning (RL) has focused on this goal and accordingly my deepest contributions are in RL . A very recent effort combines Deep Learning and Reinforcement Learning . From time to time, I take seriously the challenge of building agents that can interact with other agents and even humans in both artificial and natural environments. This has led to research in: Computational Game Theory / Mechanism Design Cognitive Science Human-Computer Interaction Over the past few years, I have begun to focus on Healthcare as an application area. Erhan Bayraktar, PhD, the holder of the Susan Smith Chair, is a full professor of Mathematics at the University of Michigan, where he has been since 2004. Professor Bayraktar’s research is in stochastic analysis, control, applied probability and mathematical finance. He has over 120 publications in top journals in these areas. Professor Bayraktar is recognized as a leader in his areas of research: he is a corresponding editor in the SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization and also serves in the editorial boards of Applied Mathematics and Optimization, Mathematics of Operations Research, Mathematical Finance. His research has been also been continually funded by the National Science Foundation; in particular, he received a CAREER grant. Professor Bayraktar has also been devoting his time to teaching and synergistic activities: Professor Bayraktar has been the director of the Risk Management and Quantitative Finance Masters program since its inception in 2015. As one of the two organizers of the Financial/Actuarial Math seminar which brings about 10-15 speakers every academic year and he has also organized several international workshops in stochastic analysis for finance and insurance in Ann Arbor. Areas of interest: Mathematical finance, applied probability, stochastic analysis, stochastic control, optimal stopping. Jenna Bednar is professor of political science and public policy at the University of Michigan.  She has been a member of the external faculty at the Santa Fe Institute since 2011 and an annual visitor since 1995.  Her research focuses on how collective action builds social goods and the role that institutions play in making that collaboration possible. Current work includes: robust system design, especially of federal democracies; models of the interdependence of culture and institutions;  and public policy to support human social flourishing.  In 2019, her book The Robust Federation: Principles of Design was awarded the APSA Martha Derthick Best Book Award in recognition of its enduring contribution to the study of federalism.  In 2020, she was named APSA Daniel Elazar Distinguished Federalism Scholar.  In the 2021-2022 year she was the Andrew W. Mellow Foundation Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford University.  She earned her B.A. from the University of Michigan and M.A. and Ph.D. from Stanford University. The goal of my research is to leverage network analysis techniques to uncover how the brain mediates sex hormone influences on gendered behavior across the lifespan. Specifically, my data science research concerns the creation and application of person-specific connectivity analyses, such as unified structural equation models, to time series data; these are intensive longitudinal data, including functional neuroimages, daily diaries, and observations. I then use these data science methods to investigate the links between androgens (e.g., testosterone) and estradiol at key developmental periods, such as puberty, and behaviors that typically show sex differences, including aspects of cognition and psychopathology. A network map showing the directed connections among 25 brain regions of interest in the resting state frontoparietal network for an individual; data were acquired via functional magnetic resonance imaging. Black lines depict connections common across individuals in the sample, gray lines depict connections specific to this individual, solid lines depict contemporaneous connections (occurring in the same volume), and dashed lines depict lagged connections (occurring between volumes). I used the tools of operations research (optimization, stochastic modeling, and game theory), machine learning, and statistics to study problems in operations management broadly defined, including supply chains, service systems, transportation and mobility, and markets. My current research focus is on sustainable operations and innovative business models, including sharing economy, on-demand services, and online marketplaces. Albert S. Berahas is an Assistant Professor in the department of Industrial & Operations Engineering. His research broadly focuses on designing, developing and analyzing algorithms for solving large scale nonlinear optimization problems. Such problems are ubiquitous, and arise in a plethora of areas such as engineering design, economics, transportation, robotics, machine learning and statistics. Specifically, he is interested in and has explored several sub-fields of nonlinear optimization such as: (i) general nonlinear optimization algorithms, (ii) optimization algorithms for machine learning, (iii) constrained optimization, (iv) stochastic optimization, (v) derivative-free optimization, and (vi) distributed optimization. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video . Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: IPODS: Innovative and Powerful Optimization Methods for Data Science with Statistical Guarantees I am interested in the intersection of big data, data science, privacy, security, public policy, and law. At U-M, this includes co-convening the Dissonance Event Series, a multi-disciplinary collaboration of faculty and graduate students that explore the confluence of technology, policy, privacy, security, and law. I frequently guest lecture on these subject across campus, including at the School of Information, Ford School of Public Policy, and the Law School. Accomplishments and Awards UMich introduces Duo Universal Prompt My research is focused on a wide range of topics from computational social sciences to bioinformatics where I do pattern recognition, perform data analysis, and build prediction models. At the core of my effort, there lie machine learning methods by which I have been trying to address problems related to social networks, opinion mining, biomarker discovery, pharmacovigilance, drug repositioning, security analytics, genomics, food contamination, and concussion recovery. I’m particularly interested in and eager to collaborate on cyber security aspect of social media analytics that includes but not limited to misinformation, bots, and fake news. In addition, I’m still pursuing opportunities in bioinformatics, especially about next generation sequencing analysis that can be also leveraged for phenotype predictions by using machine learning methods. A typical pipeline for developing and evaluating a prediction models to identify malicious Android mobile apps in the market. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Detecting Early-Warning Signals of Market Share Loss from Locus of Customer Movements My research interests include : Hamiltonian and Lagrangian mechanics, gradient flows on manifolds, integrable systems stability, the motion of mechanical systems with constraints, the relationship between continuous and discrete flows, nonlinear and optimal control and the control of quantum systems. I also interested in data-guided control and in particular the dynamics and control of networks and systems arising from large sets, particularly in biological applications. My research focuses on developing statistical methods and software tools for the analysis of human genetic data and application of those methods to understand the genetic basis of human health and disease. Our methods and tools are used by statisticians and geneticists worldwide. My disease research is focused on type 2 diabetes (T2D) and related traits and on bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Our studies are generating and analyzing genome or exome sequence data on 10,000s of individuals, requiring the efficient handling of petabyte-scale data. My research interests lie broadly in the area of artificial intelligence (AI) for social impact, particularly spanning the fields of multi-agent systems and data science for conservation and public health. Accomplishments and Awards 3 strategies healthcare can copy from aviation to refine medical AI Cultural systems are fundamentally structural phenomena, defined by patterns of relations between elements of public representations and individual behaviors and cognitions. However, because such systems are difficult to capture with traditional empirical approaches, they usually remain understudied. In my work, I draw on network analysis, statistics, and computer science to create novel approaches to such analyses, and on cognitive science to theorize the objects of these investigations. Broader questions that interest me are: how are different cultural elements interrelated with one another? What is the relationship between public cultural representations and individual cognition and behavior? And how can we capture the structure of these interrelationships across large social and time scales? Methodologically, I am currently focused no developing applications of word embeddings and other natural language processing methods to sociological questions about cultural change. Changing gender connotations of intelligence and studiousness throughout the latter half of the 20th century measured using word embeddings. Intelligence gained a masculine gender coding just as studiousness gained a masculine one. Scores are z-scored average cosine similarities between sets of keywords and a gender dimension. Data source: Corpus of Historical American English. I am an evolutionary biologist interested in understanding the causes and consequences of genetic variation across time and space. One of the fundamental goals of evolutionary biology is to quantify patterns of genetic diversity within and between populations to enable the study of the processes that shape them. However, the development of key statistical methods in population genetics lags behind the rapid generation of modern genomic datasets that require analysis. In particular, methods for studying population structure, demography, and natural selection in continuous space are still lacking, leading to a gap in our ability to answer basic questions in evolutionary biology. My research is focused on the geography of evolution: describing and quantifying spatial patterns of genetic variation between individuals and species, and developing computational and statistical methods for learning about the fundamental forces generating and maintaining those patterns. This work is highly integrative, combining statistics, computational approaches, population genetics theory, and a knowledge of the empirical systems in which I apply my methods. My lab studies how information from one sensory system influences processing in other sensory systems, as well as how this information is integrated in the brain. Specifically, we investigate the mechanisms underlying basic auditory, visual, and tactile interactions, synesthesia, multisensory body image perception, and visual facilitation of speech perception. Our current research examines multisensory processes using a variety of techniques including psychophysical testing and illusions, fMRI and DTI, electrophysiological measures of neural activity (both EEG and iEEG), and lesion mapping in patients with brain tumors. Our intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG/ECoG/sEEG) recordings are a unique resource that allow us to record neural activity directly from the human brain from clinically implanted electrodes in patients. These recordings are collected while patients perform the same auditory, visual, and tactile tasks that we use in our other behavioral and neuroimaging studies, but iEEG measures have millisecond temporal resolution as well as millimeter spatial precision, providing unparalleled information about the flow of neural activity in the brain. We use signal processing techniques and machine learning methods to identify how information is encoded in the brain and how it is disrupted in clinical contexts (e.g., in patients with a brain tumor). The basis of my work is to make the often invisible traces created by interactions students have with learning technologies available to instructors, technology solutions, and students themselves. This often requires the creation of new novel educational technologies which are designed from the beginning with detailed tracking of user activities. Coupled with machine learning and data mining techniques (e.g. classification, regression, and clustering methods), clickstream data from these technologies is used to build predictive models of student success and to better understand how technology affords benefits in teaching and learning. I’m interested in broadly scaled teaching and learning through Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), how predictive models can be used to understand student success, and the analysis of educational discourse and student writing. Our work is focused on the applications of statistical mechanics to the modeling and simulation of processes in biology, ranging from small molecule discovery for therapeutics and tool molecules, novel free energy methods for drug and protein design, biocatalyst discovery and design, and protein and RNA folding. Data science and machine learning, more specifically, are integral to the development and application areas under study in our group. Applications integrating data science and AI approaches include recent efforts to discover and design protein molecules to perform highly specific chemical transformations (biocatalysts). Other areas include enhanced sampling of chemical space in free energy calculations. Andrew uses mathematical and statistical modeling to address public health problems. As a mathematical epidemiologist, he works on a wide range of topics (mostly related to infectious diseases and cancer prevention and survival) using an array of computational and statistical tools, including mechanistic differential equations and multistate stochastic processes. Rigorous consideration of parameter identifiability, parameter estimation, and uncertainty quantification are underlying themes in Andrew’s work. I am a computational social scientist and sociologist. In addition to my appointments at Michigan, I am an external faculty member at the Santa Fe Institute and serve on their Science Steering Committee; I also serve on the advisory board for the Social Science Research Council’s Social Data Initiative. The vast amounts of activity data from sources such as cell phones and the Internet make it possible to study human behavior with an unparalleled richness of detail. Such “big data” are interesting to me in large part because they are behavioral data that allow us to observe how people explore their environment, engage in novel or habitual behaviors, interact with others, and learn from past experiences. My work combines models of human behavior with network science techniques to explore how individuals navigate complex and/or socially structured environments. One line of work focuses on developing “cognitively plausible” models of human decision-making. A 2016 paper used data from a major online dating site to look at mate selection strategies (e.g., the extent to which people invoke ‘deal-breakers’ or ‘deal-makers’) and how these strategies differ by age, gender, and other attributes. A 2019 study examined the decision processes that guide neighborhood choice, and the implications of these strategies for segregation dynamics. My more recent work on decision-making looks at how college students navigate course-taking and major declaration in a large public university, and the implications of these decision strategies for broader patterns of inequality. A second line of work uses network science techniques to examine the structure of social environments. In two recent papers (2018, 2019), I described the vertical and horizontal organization of online dating markets, e.g., the extent to which singles are concentrated in particular submarkets and/or pursue partners who are “out of their league.” More recent ongoing work includes one project that examines competition in online dating markets and the strategies that mate-seekers use to mitigate that competition, and another project that describes the interdependent structure of curriculums for different majors at a large public university, and the implications of this structure for the flow of students through those majors. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Developing a large-scale dataset to track romantic relationship formation and maintenance Sophia Brueckner is a futurist artist/designer/engineer. Inseparable from computers since the age of two, she believes she is a cyborg. As an engineer at Google, she designed and built products used by millions. At RISD and the MIT Media Lab, she researched the simultaneously empowering and controlling nature of technology with a focus on haptics and social interfaces. Her work has been featured internationally by Artforum, SIGGRAPH, The Atlantic, Wired, the Peabody Essex Museum, Portugal’s National Museum of Contemporary Art, and more. Brueckner is the founder and creative director of Tomorrownaut, a creative studio focusing on speculative futures and sci-fi-inspired prototypes. She is currently an artist-in-residence at Nokia Bell Labs, was previously an artist-in-residence at Autodesk, and is an assistant professor at the University of Michigan teaching Sci-Fi Prototyping, a course combining sci-fi, prototyping, and ethics. Her ongoing objective is to combine her background in art, design, and engineering to inspire a more positive future. Katherine Brumberg’s research focuses on matching and stratification methods in observational studies. Her main contributions have been in developing new methods for optimizing the balance of covariates between the treated and control groups using approximation algorithms to solve intractable integer programs. She applies this research in healthcare and social science domains and has a particular interest in education policy. I am broadly interested in Bayesian and computational statistics for analyzing large-scale and complex data. I am particularly interested in spatio-temporal statistics, network inference, infectious disease models, and distributed learning. My methodological research has been motivated by applications in public health, observational healthcare studies, computational social science, and sports sciences. I came from a math background but studied statistics in order to become a sports analyst (yes, Moneyball!). Throughout my PhD and postdoc training, I grew a strong appreciation for social sciences (how people behave and interact) and health sciences (how to provide high-quality healthcare for everyone). I see data science as the field to help us make sense of complex data that arise from our daily life and scientific endeavors, by building reliable and reproducible frameworks that transform data to evidence and then to scientific findings and decisions. Ceren Budak is a Assistant Professor at the University of Michigan School of Information and her lie in the area of computational social science; a discipline at the intersection of computer science, statistics, and the social sciences. She is particularly interested in applying large scale data analysis techniques to study problems with social, political, and policy implications. Dr. Bui integrates interdisciplinary, sociotechnical, and community-based research methods and approaches to explore the opportunities for, and obstacles to, racial and data justice within society. Bui’s research primarily examines: 1) how individuals and communities call attention to—and subvert—issues of power and inequality within and through data and data science; and 2) the impacts of digital media and data-driven technologies within Black, Indigenous, and other People of Color (BIPOC) communities. In all, Dr. Bui seeks to advance both critical frameworks as well as novel data-driven methodologies that engage with the intersections of racial and data justice. Dr. Bui’s research focuses on the operation and control of power and energy systems. We develop energy management systems aimed at optimizing the entire system’s operation to minimize operation costs, enhance system reliability, and improve system resiliency in both normal and emergency operation modes. Recently, the high penetration of distributed energy resources (DERs), including photovoltaics, wind turbines, and controllable distributed generators, in modern power systems has introduced numerous sources of uncertainty, making the operation and control of power systems significantly challenging. Conventional optimization methods often struggle to handle the high uncertainty of DER outputs. With the rapid development of AI/ML algorithms and their wide applications in the engineering domain, these techniques offer potential solutions for operating and controlling power systems. Our research group also investigates the state-of-the-art models in ML, such as deep learning, deep reinforcement learning, and physics-informed graph neural networks, and their applications in power and energy systems. I conduct research on the use of consumer-facing technologies for chronic disease self management. My work predominantly centers on the use of mobile applications that collect and manage patient generated health data overt time. Many biological assays require detection and quantification of chemical species in aqueous solutions. Dr. Burns has worked to develop inexpensive and easy ways to fabricate sensors that can detect proteins, small molecules, and ions in biological fluids such as blood, urine, and saliva. The sensors use a combination of electrochemical reactions, steric hinderance, and optical quantum dot excitation to perform the assays. Some examples of these systems are: an inclined channel to trap antibody-containing beads binding marker proteins associated with traumatic brain injury (TBI), a multi-electrode device to measure chloride ion concentrations in urine, and a spatially controlled deposition of metals and oxides to detect impurities in liquids. In developing these systems, he has found that using data science tools such as random forest models can help increase the sensitivity and extend the life of sensors. Bilal Butt is an Associate Professor in the School for Environment and Sustainability at the University of Michigan. His research is concerned with understanding the drivers and effects of violent conflicts over natural resources. He places a large emphasis on empirical fieldwork to understand the lived geographies of the interactions between people and the environment in ecologically heterogeneous regions. He combines various geospatial technologies with historical and ecological dynamics of dryland environments to understand how differential power relations between agencies, states, and other actors come together to influence the etiology of resource conflicts. He is also interested in the ways that scientific and technical appraisals of indigenous peoples and environments have misread the landscape, leading to orientalist approaches to development programs. He has also had a long history of engagement on questions of environmental conflicts, particularly around wildlife poaching, land grabs, and green energy. Dr. Butt received the National Science Foundations Career Award and is a recipient of the Superior Teaching Award from the University of Michigan. He has published in diverse journals such as the Annals of the Association of American Geographers, Remote Sensing of Environment, Journal of Applied Ecology and Humanity. He teaches courses on Conservation and Development, Political Ecology, Environmental Security and Conflict, Environmental Governance, and Preparing for International Fieldwork. Wildlife-Livestock Relationships in Kenya Dr. Byon’s research interests include reliability evaluation, fault diagnosis/condition monitoring, predictive modeling and data analytics, and operations and maintenance decision-making for stochastic systems. Her recent research focuses on uncertainty quantification of stochastic systems using stochastic simulations, reliability analysis and improvement of large-scale, interconnected systems with applications to renewable power power systems and manufacturing processes. She is a member of IIE, INFORMS, and IEEE. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Coordinated Multi-building Modeling and Management for Flexible Grid Service Innovation My group investigates hypertension using a principally patient-oriented approach, with key aspects of our work being collaborative with data scientists. For example, I collaborated with Casey Greene, PhD, computational biologist, on a project using generative adversarial neural networks to create a privacy-preserving dataset derivative of the SPRINT hypertension clinical trial. The work incorporated concepts from the differential privacy field, and the intent is to make clinical trial data sharing more feasible. Changxiao Cai’s research interests lie broadly in the intersection of statistics, optimization, and machine learning. He is interested in developing provably scalable methods for information extraction from high-dimensional data, with an aim to achieve the optimal interplay between statistical accuracy and computational efficiency. Jessica K. Camp, PhD, is Assistant Professor of social work in the Department of Health and Health Services at the University of Michigan, Dearborn. Her research focuses on using large nationally representative data from the United States and internationally (SIPP, ACS, GSOEP) to explore trends in poverty and inequality. Specifically, I examine ways that marginalized and hyper-marginalized groups experience economic disparity and labor market exclusion. My most recent completed study showed how welfare reform can have a powerful impact on the well-being of working women, especially women with vulnerabilities. My area of expertise as a data analyst is in complex samples, regression, and longitudinal models. I am hoping my future work will inform ways that “Big Data” can be used in social work research. My research focuses on developing and using methods in machine learning and natural language processing to learn about society from text, promoting better and more reproducible data science, and studying the societal impacts of these technologies. I collaborate with colleagues in statistics, linguistics, political science, and other areas of computational social science to investigate how people communicate, the effects of this communication, and to better understand the potential consequences and limitations of data science and artificial intelligence. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Neural Quantum States at Scale: Applications in Sciences and Engineering. Carter’s research combines quantitative, theoretical, and field approaches to address challenging local to global wildlife conservation issues in the Anthropocene. His work includes projects on endangered species conservation in human-dominated areas of Nepal, post-war recovery of wildlife in Mozambique, human-wildlife coexistence in the American West, and the effects of artificial lights and human-made noise on wildlife habitat across the contiguous US. Research methods focus on: (1) spatializing both human and wildlife processes, (2) probabilistic methods to infer human-wildlife interactions (3) simulation models of coupled natural-human systems, and (4) forecasting and decision-support tools. Tim Cernak, PhD, is Assistant Professor of Medicinal Chemistry with secondary appointments in Chemistry and the Chemical Biology Program at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. The functional and biological properties of a small molecule are encoded within its structure so synthetic strategies that access diverse structures are paramount to the invention of novel functional molecules such as biological probes, materials or pharmaceuticals. The Cernak Lab studies the interface of chemical synthesis and computer science to understand the relationship of structure, properties and reactions. We aim to use algorithms, robotics and big data to invent new chemical reactions, synthetic routes to natural products, and small molecule probes to answer questions in basic biology. Researchers in the group learn high-throughput chemical and biochemical experimentation, basic coding, and modern synthetic techniques. By studying the relationship of chemical synthesis to functional properties, we pursue the opportunity to positively impact human health. We have developed and tested machine learning approaches to integrate quantitative markers for diagnosis and assessment of progression of TMJ OA, as well as extended the capabilities of 3D Slicer4 into web-based tools and disseminated open source image analysis tools. Our aims use data processing and in-depth analytics combined with learning using privileged information, integrated feature selection, and testing the performance of longitudinal risk predictors. Our long term goals are to improve diagnosis and risk prediction of TemporoMandibular Osteoarthritis in future multicenter studies. The Spectrum of Data Science for Diagnosis of Osteoarthritis of the Temporomandibular Joint My research interests are in the area of natural language processing, situated dialogue agents, and artificial intelligence. I’m particularly interested in language processing that is sensorimotor-grounded, pragmatically-rich, and cognitively-motivated. My current work explores the intersection of language, vision, and robotics to facilitate situated communication with embodied agents and applies different types of data (e.g., capturing human behaviors in communication, perception, and, action) to advance core intelligence of AI. My broad research interests are in multi-agent systems, computational economics and finance, and artificial intelligence. I apply techniques from algorithmic game theory, statistical machine learning, decision theory, etc. to a variety of problems at the intersection of the computational and social sciences. A major focus of my research has been the design and analysis of market-making algorithms for financial markets and, in particular, prediction markets — incentive-based mechanisms for aggregating data in the form of private beliefs about uncertain events (e.g. the outcome of an election) distributed among strategic agents. I use both analytical and simulation-based methods to investigate the impact of factors such as wealth, risk attitude, manipulative behavior, etc. on information aggregation in market ecosystems. Another line of work I am pursuing involves algorithms for allocating resources based on preference data collected from potential recipients, satisfying efficiency, fairness, and diversity criteria; my joint work on ethnicity quotas in Singapore public housing allocation deserves special mention in this vein. More recently, I have got involved in research on empirical game-theoretic analysis, a family of methods for building tractable models of complex, procedurally defined games from empirical/simulated payoff data and using them to reason about game outcomes. My research interests are in developing inter-disciplinary knowledge in System Informatics, as the basis for study of complex system problems with the fusion of theory, computation, and application components adopted from Systems and Informatics fields. In this framework, a complex system such as the supply chain is posited as a System-of-Systems; i.e., a collection of individual business entities organized as a composite system with their resources and capabilities pooled to obtain an interoperable and synergistic system, possessing common and shared goals and objectives. Informatics facilitates coordination and integration in the system by processing and sharing information among supply chain entities for improved decision-making. A common theme of my research is the basic foundation of universality of system and the realization that what makes it unique is its environment. This has enabled to categorize problems, designs, models, methodologies, and solution techniques at macro and micro levels and develop innovative solutions by coordinating these levels in an integrated environment. My goal is to study the efficacy of the body of knowledge available in Systems Theory, Information Science, Artificial Intelligence & Knowledge Management, Management Science, Industrial Engineering and Operations Research fields; applied uniquely to issues and problems of complex systems in the manufacturing and service sectors. Theoretical work investigated by me in this research thrust relates to: Developing Generalized System Taxonomies and Ontologies for complex systems management. Experimenting with Problem Taxonomies for design and modeling efficiencies in complex system networks. Developing methodologies, frameworks and reference models for complex systems management. Computation and application development focused on developing algorithms and software development for: Supply chain information system and knowledge library using Web-based technology as a dissemination tool. Integration with Enterprise Resource Planning modules in SAP software. Supply chain management problem-solving through application of problem specific simulation and optimization. My research has extended to application domains in healthcare, textiles, automotive, and defense sectors. Problems and issues addressed relate to health care management, operationalizing of sustainability, energy conservation, global logistics management, mega-disaster recovery, humanitarian needs management, and entrepreneurship management. Currently, my application focus is on expanding the breadth and depth of inquiry in the healthcare domain. Among the topics being investigated are: (1) the organization and structure of health care enterprises; and (2) operations and strategies that relate to management of critical success factors, such as costs, quality, innovation and technology adoption by health care providers. Two significant topics that I have chosen to study with regard to care for elderly patients suffering from chronic congestive heart failure and hypertension are: (1) the design of patient-centered health care delivery to improve quality of care; and (2) managing enhanced care costs due to readmission of these patients. Data science applications : Real-time data processing in supply chains, Knowledge portals for decision-making in supply chains, information sharing for optimizing patient-centered healthcare delivery Sriram Chandrasekaran, PhD, is an Associate Professor, Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering & Michigan Medicine Dr. Chandrasekaran’s Systems Biology and Drug Discovery lab develops computer models to decipher how thousands of proteins work together to orchestrate complex processes like embryonic development or metabolism and how this complex network breaks down in diseases like cancer. They are developing software tools to design drug combinations with enhanced potency and reduced potential for developing resistance. Systems biology software tools developed by his lab are available at https://systemsbiologylab.org/software . He teaches the AI in BME (BME 487) course that introduces students to AI and machine-learning algorithms and their applications in BME.  Learn more at the course website: https://systemsbiologylab.org/ai-bme-syllabus Research Overview: We develop computational algorithms that integrate omics measurements to create detailed genome-scale models of cellular networks. Some clinical applications of our algorithms include finding metabolic vulnerabilities in pathogens (M. tuberculosis) using PROM, and designing multi combination therapeutics for reducing antibiotic resistance using INDIGO. Accomplishments and Awards AI Predicts Patient Response to Specific TB Treatments 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Combating and predicting drug resistance using a hybrid mechanistic machine learning model Multimodal AI model may guide personalized treatments for tuberculosis Xiuli Chao’s research interests include queueing, scheduling, financial engineering, inventory control, and supply chain management. He is the co-developer of Lekin Scheduling System. He is the co-author of two books, Operations Scheduling with Applications in Manufacturing and Services (Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 1998), and Queueing Networks: Customers, Signals, and Product Form Solutions (John Wiley & Sons, 1999). Chao received the 1998 Erlang Prize from the Applied Probability Society of the Institute for Operations Research and Management Science (INFORMS), and received the 2005 David F. Baker Distinguished Research Award from the Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers (IISE). He also received the Jon R. and Beverly S. Holt Award for Teaching Excellence  from the College of Engineering of the University of Michigan. Chao is a fellow of both IISE and INFORMS. My current data science research interest lies in the broad area of supply chain and its management.   I am particularly interested in using longitudinal data set to identify early signals (or warning) and to draw causal inferences pertaining to supply chain security and product quality and safety.   I am also interested in developing experiments to capture the behavioral side of decision makings to be complementary to secondary data analysis.   Industry setting wise, I have based my research on the auto industry, and will expand my auto-industry centered research into a broader, transportation industry oriented context.   I am also interested in food and agricultural products, pharmaceutical, and medical devices industries where product quality and safety have significant implications to human life and society as a whole. Jowei Chen studies redistricting, political geography, distributive politics, and executive agencies. His research has examined the partisan and racial effects of redistricting maps and the effect of political geography on redistricting outcomes. He has studied how legislators’ pork-barreling strategies are shaped by the electoral geography of their districts and how government spending influences voters. Finally, his research has analyzed the political control of executive agencies. Chen has summarized his research through op-ed articles published in the Washington Post , Time Magazine , and the New York Times . In 2019, Common Cause honored Chen as a “Defender of Democracy ” for his work on partisan gerrymandering. Yang Chen received her Ph.D. (2017) in Statistics from Harvard University and then joined the University of Michigan as an Assistant Professor of Statistics and Research Assistant Professor at the Michigan Institute of Data Science (MIDAS). She received her B.A. in Mathematics and Applied Mathematics from the University of Science and Technology of China. Research interests include computational algorithms in statistical inference and applied statistics in the field of biology and astronomy. Accomplishments and Awards $2M to fast track stronger alloys 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Data Science Approach towards a Socio-ecological Framework for the Investigation of Continental Urban Stream Water Quality Pattern 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Sustainability outcomes of restrictions on human actions: COVID-19 mobility changes, forest fires and air pollution across land regime Lei Chen’s group focus on applying data science tools to advanced manufacturing. Chen’s research expertise and interests are to integrate the physics-based computational and experimental methods and data-driven approaches, to exploit the fundamental phenomena emerged in advanced manufacturing and to establish the design protocol for optimizing the materials and process parameters of as-fabricated parts for quality control. Current research can be summarized by: 1 One of significant challenges in additive manufacturing (AM) is the presence of heterogeneous sources of uncertainty involved in the complex layer-wise processes under non-equilibrium conditions that lead to variability in the microstructure and properties of as-built components. Consequently, it is extremely challenging to repeat the manufacturing of a high-quality product in mass production, and current practice usually reverts to trial-and-error techniques that are very time-consuming and costly. This research aims to develop an uncertainty quantification framework by bringing together physical modeling, machine-learning (ML), and experiments. 2 Computational microstructure optimization of piezocomposites involves iterative searches to achieve the desired combination of properties demanded by a selected application. Traditional analytical-based optimization methods suffer from the searching efficiency and result optimality due to high dimensionality of microstructure space, complicated electrical and mechanical coupling and non-uniqueness of solutions. Moreover, AM process inherently poses several manufacturing constraints e.g., the minimum feature size and the porosity in the piezoelectric ceramics as well as at the ceramics-polymer interface. It is challenging to include such manufacturing constraints since they are not explicitly available. This research aims to develop a novel data-driven framework for microstructure optimization of AM piezoelectric composites by leveraging extensive physics-based simulation data as well as limited amount of measurement data from AM process. 3 Lithium (Li) and other alkali metals (e.g., sodium and potassium) are very attractive electrode candidates for the next-generation rechargeable batteries that promise several times higher energy density at lower cost. However, Li-dendrite formation severely limits the commercialization of Li-metal batteries, either because dendrite pieces lose electrical contact with the rest of the Li-electrode or because growing dendrites can penetrate the separator and lead to short circuits. This research aims to develop a computational model to accelerate the design of dendrite-free Li-metal batteries. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. Blueprint for the research: data-driven modelling of additive manufacturing. Stereolithography-based and laser melting-based additive manufacturing processes are used to fabricate the powder-based piezoelectric ceramics and metals respectively, with controllable complex microstructures and/or architectures to tune material properties. Physics-based numerical simulations are performed in an “in-house” multiscale computational framework, which includes macroscopic finite-element based manufacturing process modelling, mesoscopic phase-field modelling of microstructure evolution and design, and first principles/CALPHAD calculation of thermodynamics and kinetics. Data-driven approaches include machine learning and uncertainty quantification with surrogate models, such as polynomial chaos expansion, Gaussian process, radial basis functions, etc. Yan Chen’s research interests are in behavioral and experimental economics, market and mechanism design. She conducts large-scale randomized field experiments on gig economy platforms to test the efficacy of team formation algorithms on gig worker productivity and retention. She also conducts experiments in online communities to evaluate what increases pro-social behavior. Her experiments are informed by economic theory and causal inference techniques. Accomplishments and Awards Faculty members, school, advocacy groups to be honored One project my group worked on is cost-efficient use of large language models (LLMs). Recently, there has been a proliferation of LLMs by multiple providers, each with different inference accuracy, monetary cost, and latency. If a user has a finite monetary budget and wants to use LLMs to solve a series of problems, how should they allocate their dollars across diverse LLMs? We propose a reinforcement learning approach, TREACLE, that learns which LLMs to choose, intelligently trading off accuracy for cost. This work appeared in NeurIPS 2024. I started off as a undergraduate studying biomedical engineering. I have a diploma in piano performance. I love traditional Chinese lion dance and used to perform all over New York City during university. Multi-center clinical trials increasingly utilize quantitative diffusion imaging (DWI) to aid in patient management and treatment response assessment for translational oncology applications. A major source of systematic bias in diffusion was discovered originating from platform-dependent gradient hardware. Left uncorrected, these biases confound quantitative diffusion metrics used for characterization of tissue pathology and treatment response leading to inconclusive findings, and increasing the requisite subject numbers and trial cost. We have developed technology to mitigate systematic diffusion mapping bias that exists on MRI scanners and are in process of deploying this technology for multi-center clinical trials. Another major source of variance and bottleneck in high-throughput analysis of quantitative diffusion maps is segmentation of tumor/tissue volume of interest (VOI) based on intensities and patterns on multi-contrast MR image datasets, as well as reliable assessment of longitudinal change with disease progression or response to treatment. Our goal is development/trial/application AI algorithms for robust (semi-) automated VOI definition in analysis of multi-dimensional MR datasets for oncology trials. Representative apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) histograms and map overlays are shown for oncology trials to be supported by this Academic Industrial Partnership (AIP). ADC is used to characterize tumor malignancy of breast cancer, therapeutic effect in head and neck (H&N) and cellular proliferation in bone marrow of myelofibrosis (MF) patients. Relevant clinical outcome metrics are illustrated under histograms for detection sensitivity threshold (to reduce unnecessary breast biopsies (13)), Kaplan-Meier analysis of therapy response (stratified by median SD of H&N metastatic node (23)), and histopathologic proliferation stage (MF cellular infiltration classification). I am a computer scientist and an associate professor at CSE Michigan, where I lead the SymbioticLab (https://symbioticlab.org/). My research improves application performance and system efficiency of AI/ML and Big Data workloads with a recent focus on optimizing energy consumption and data privacy. I lead the ML Energy initiative (https://ml.energy/), a consortium of researchers focusing on understanding, controlling, and reducing AI/ML energy consumption. Over the course of my career, I have worked on a variety of networked and distributed systems. Recent major projects include Infiniswap, the first scalable memory disaggregation solution; Salus, the first software-only GPU sharing system for deep learning; FedScale, a scalable federated learning and analytics platform; and Zeus, the first GPU energy optimizer for AI. In the past, I invented the coflow abstraction for efficient distributed communication, and I am one of the original creators of Apache Spark. Thanks to my excellent collaborators, I have received many individual awards, fellowships, and paper awards from top venues like NSDI, OSDI, ATC, and MICRO. Dr. Michael Cianfrocco uses cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to determine protein structures to understand how nanometer-sized molecular machines work. While a powerful technique, cryo-EM data collection and subsequent image analysis remain bespoke, clunky, and heuristic. Dr. Cianfrocco is coupling his 16+ years of experience with artificial intelligence to automate data collection and processing by capturing human expertise into AI-based algorithms. Recently, his laboratory implemented reinforcement learning to guide cryo-electron microscopes for data collection [1, 2]. This work combined real-world datasets and Dr. Cianfrocco’s expertise with AI-driven optimization algorithms to find the ‘best’ areas of cryo-EM samples for data collection. Human users must curate and select areas for subsequent analysis after data collection. Subjective decisions guide how to process the single particles and determine what constitutes ‘good’ data. To automate subsequent preprocessing, Dr. Cianfrocco’s lab built the first AI-backed data preprocessing in cryo-EM by training CNNs to recognize ‘good’ and ‘bad’ cryo-EM data [3]. This work enabled fully-automated cryo-EM data preprocessing, the first step in the processing pipeline of cryo-EM data. In the future, Dr. Cianfrocco wants to continue improving cryo-EM workflows to make them robust and automated, eventually surpassing human experts in the ability of algorithms to collect and analyze cryo-EM data. 1. Fan Q*, Li Y*, et al. “CryoRL: Reinforcement Learning Enables Efficient Cryo-EM Data Collection.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.07543 (2022). 2. Li Y*, Fan Q*, Optimized path planning surpasses human efficiency in cryo-EM imaging. bioRxiv 2022.06.17.496614 (2022). 3. Li Y, High-Throughput Cryo-EM Enabled by User-Free Preprocessing Routines. Structure. 2020 Jul 7;28(7):858-869.e3. Amy Cohn, PhD, is a Thurnau Professor in the Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering at the University of Michigan College of Engineering and Director of the Center for Healthcare Engineering and Patient Safety.  Her primary research interest is in robust and integrated planning for large-scale systems, predominantly in healthcare and aviation applications. Her primary teaching interest is in optimization techniques, at both the graduate and undergraduate level. Kevyn Collins-Thompson, PhD, is Associate Professor of Information, School of Information and Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, College of Engineering, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. My lab explores algorithms and interfaces for intelligent information systems that can infer when and how to help people learn and discover. Examples include search engines that can deliver the right kind of personalized information at the right time, and intelligent tutoring systems that learn when and how to be most helpful in teaching a particular student. Toward these goals, I employ data-centric methods that include machine learning from interaction traces and large-scale text mining and retrieval. My current research is centered on education, but I’m also interested in mobile and health-related applications. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Exploring Attention-based Deep Learning Methods for Improving Students’ Ability to Engage with Scientific Literature Fred Conrad’s research concerns the development of new methods and data sources for conducting social research. His work is largely focused on survey methodology, but he also explores the use of social media content as a complement to survey data and as a source of large-scale qualitative insights. His focus is on data quality and reducing measurement error. For example, live video interviews promote more thoughtful responses, e.g., less straightlining – the tendency to give the same answer to a battery of survey questions, but they also promote less candor when answering questions on sensitive topics. Measurement error in social media include misclassification in the automated interpretation of content using methods such as sentiment analysis and topic modeling, as well as selective self-presentation (only posting flattering content). Equally challenging is not knowing the extent to which users differ from the population to which one might wish to generalize results. My PhD research focused on identifying the size and mineralogical composition of interstellar dust through X-ray imaging of dust scattering halos to X-ray spectroscopy of bright objects to study absorption from intervening material. Over the course of my PhD I also developed an open source, object oriented approach to computing extinction properties of particles in Python that allows the user to change the scattering physics models and composition properties of dust grains very easily. In many cases, the signal I look for from interstellar dust requires evaluating the observational data on the 1-5% level. This has required me to develop a deep understanding of both the instrument and the counting statistics (because modern-day X-ray instruments are photon counting tools). My expertise led me to a postdoc at MIT, where I developed techniques to obtain high resolution X-ray spectra from low surface brightness (high background) sources imaged with the Chandra X-ray Observatory High Energy Transmission Grating Spectrometer. I pioneered these techniques in order to extract and analyze the high resolution spectrum of Sgr A*, our Galaxy’s central supermassive black hole (SMBH), producing a legacy dataset with a precision that will not be replaceable for decades. This dataset will be used to understand why Sgr A* is anomalously inactive, giving us clues to the connection between SMBH activity and galactic evolution. In order to publish the work, I developed an open source software package, pyXsis (github.com/eblur/pyxsis) in order to model the low signal-to-noise spectrum of Sgr A* simultaneously with a non-physical parameteric model of the background spectrum (Corrales et al., 2020). As a result of my vocal advocacy for Python compatible software tools and a modular approach to X-ray data analysis, I became Chair for HEACIT (which stands for “High Energy Astrophysics Codes, Interfaces, and Tools”), a new self-appointed working group of X-ray software engineers and early career scientists interested in developing tools for future X-ray observatories. We are working to identify science cases that high energy astronomers find difficult to support with the current software libraries, provide a central and publicly available online forum for tutorials and discussion of current software libraries, and develop a set of best practices for X-ray data analysis. My research focus is now turning to exoplanet atmospheres, where I hope to measure absorption from molecules and aerosols in the UV. Utilizing UM access to the Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory, I work to observe the dip in a star’s brightness caused by occultation (transit) from a foreground planet. Transit depths are typically &lt;1%, and telescopes like Swift were not originally designed with transit measurements (i.e., this level of precision) in mind. As a result, this research strongly depends on robust methods of scientific inference from noisy datasets. cirx1_heinz_pretty_image As a graduate student, I attended some of the early “Python in Astronomy” workshops. While there, I wrote Jupyter Notebook tutorials that helped launch the Astropy Tutorials project (github.com/astropy/astropy-tutorials), which expanded to Learn Astropy (learn.astropy.org), for which I am a lead developer. Since then, I have also become a leader within the larger Astropy collaboration. I have helped develop the Astropy Project governance structure, hired maintainers, organized workshops, and maintained an AAS presence for the Astropy Project and NumFocus (the non-profit umbrella organization that works to sustain open source software communities in scientific computing) for the last several years. As a woman of color in a STEM field, I work to clear a path by teaching the skills I have learned along the way to other underrepresented groups in STEM. This year I piloted WoCCode (Women of Color Code), an online network and webinar series for women from minoritized backgrounds to share expertise and support each other in contributing to open source software communities. The Corso group’s main research thrust is high-level computer vision and its relationship to human language, robotics and data science. They primarily focus on problems in video understanding such as video segmentation, activity recognition, and video-to-text; methodology, models leveraging cross-model cues to learn structured embeddings from large-scale data sources as well as graphical models emphasizing structured prediction over large-scale data sources are their emphasis. From biomedicine to recreational video, imaging data is ubiquitous. Yet, imaging scientists and intelligence analysts are without an adequate language and set of tools to fully tap the information-rich image and video. His group works to provide such a language.  His long-term goal is a comprehensive and robust methodology of automatically mining, quantifying, and generalizing information in large sets of projective and volumetric images and video to facilitate intelligent computational and robotic agents that can natural interact with humans and within the natural world. Relating visual content to natural language requires models at multiple scales and emphases; here we model low-level visual content, high-level ontological information, and these two are glued together with an adaptive graphical structure at the mid-level. Accomplishments and Awards Annotation is dead Kai S. Cortina, PhD, is Professor of Psychology in the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Cortina’s major research revolves around the understanding of children’s and adolescents’ pathways into adulthood and the role of the educational system in this process. The academic and psycho-social development is analyzed from a life-span perspective exclusively analyzing longitudinal data over longer periods of time (e.g., from middle school to young adulthood). The hierarchical structure of the school system (student/classroom/school/district/state/nations) requires the use of statistical tools that can handle these kind of nested data. Dr. Costa’s goal is to maximize survival and minimize morbidity for mechanically ventilated adults. She accomplishes this through her research on the organization and management of critical care. Specifically, her work identifies key structural and functional characteristics of ICU interprofessional teams that can be leveraged to improve the delivery of high quality, complex care to mechanically ventilated patients. She is a trained health services researcher with clinical expertise in adult critical care nursing. Her work care has been published in leading journals such as JAMA, Chest, and Critical Care Medicine. Her current research examines ICU teamwork and patient outcomes, linking individual clinicians to individual patients using the Electronic Health Record, and using qualitative approaches to understand how to improve ICU teams. Her research has focused on ICU clinician staffing, well-being and psychological outcomes of ICU clinicians as a way to improve care and outcomes of ICU patients. Michael is an Assistant Professor of Energy Systems at the University of Michigan’s School for Environment and Sustainability and PI of the ASSET Lab. He researches how to equitably reduce global and local environmental impacts of energy systems while making those systems robust to future climate change. His research advances energy system models to address new challenges driven by decarbonization, climate adaptation, and equity objectives. He then applies these models to real-world systems to generate decision-relevant insights that account for engineering, economic, climatic, and policy features. His energy system models leverage optimization and simulation methods, depending on the problem at hand. Applying these models to climate mitigation or adaptation in real-world systems often runs into computational limits, which he overcomes through clustering, sampling, and other data reduction algorithms. His current interdisciplinary collaborations include climate scientists, hydrologists, economists, urban planners, epidemiologists, and diverse engineers. Accomplishments and Awards UM Study: Climate Change will increase the value of rooftop solar panels Bill Currie studies how physical, chemical, and ecological processes work together in the functioning of ecosystems such as forests and wetlands.  He studies how human impacts and management alter key ecosystem responses including nutrient retention, carbon storage, plant species interactions, and plant productivity.   Dr. Currie uses computer models of ecosystems, including models in which he leads the development team, to explore ecosystem function across the spectrum from wildland to heavily human-impacted systems.  He often works in collaborative groups where a model is used to provide synthesis. He is committed to the idea that researchers must work together across traditional fields to address the complex environmental and sustainability issues of the 21st century.  He collaborates with field ecologists, geographers, remote sensing scientists, hydrologists, and land management professionals. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Data Science Approach towards a Socio-ecological Framework for the Investigation of Continental Urban Stream Water Quality Pattern My research is about building sample-efficient machine learning models. My long term goal is to develop collaborative systems that can actively seek advice from humans and make faster decisions, resulting in reliable and practical systems. I specifically focus on design of sequential decision-making models to make them learn faster. We leverage advice from humans in various forms (implicit and explicit) to encourage favorable decisions and avoid decisions having catastrophic consequences. We also focus on minimizing the cost of seeking advice by building suitable machine learning models from historical advice data and reusing them when required. Our research also develops ways to solve complex tasks in Reinforcement Learning by leveraging various kinds of knowledge transfer mechanisms, curriculum learning, teacher-student framework etc. Advances in these directions would make decision-making models sample-efficient and better suited for solving real-world problems. Along the supervised machine learning spectrum, we also focus on problems related to learning with less data, traditionally known as Active Learning, semi-supervised learning, and learning from multiple experts. Mark S. Daskin, PhD, holds the Clyde W. Johnson Collegiate Professorship in the Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering of the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.  He is a past-president of INFORMS , the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences .  He is also the former chair of the IE/MS Department as well as a past editor-in-chief of IIE Transactions , the flagship journal of IIE , the Institute of Industrial Engineers .  He is a past vice president of publications of INFORMS.  Finally, he has served on a number of editorial boards and is a former editor-in-chief of Transportation Science . Prof. Daskin’s research focuses on supply chain network design in general and facility location models in particular.  He is currently studying reliability in supply chain design as well as sustainability issues associated with supply chains.  He is also studying problems in health care operations research with a current focus on transplantation problems and the assignment of residents and interns to patients.  He has taught courses on:  probability, statistics, operations research, supply chain reliability, location modeling, health care operations research, service operations management, and heuristic algorithms.  Currently, Prof. Daskin is teaching a course on service operations management for upper level undergraduates and MS students. My research is broadly concerned with corporate governance and the effects of finance on society. Recent writings examine how ideas about corporate social responsibility have evolved to meet changes in the structures and geographic footprint of multinational corporations; whether “shareholder capitalism” is still a viable model for economic development; how income inequality in an economy is related to corporate size and structure; why theories about organizations do (or do not) progress; how architecture shapes social networks and innovation in organizations; why stock markets spread to some countries and not others; and whether there exist viable organizational alternatives to shareholder-owned corporations in the United States. Recent publications are available at http://webuser.bus.umich.edu/gfdavis/articles.htm. Ties Among the Fortune 1000 Corporate Boards Dr. Davis is a health services researcher who has additional training in data science. His research focuses on leveraging large sources of data to study important policy-relevant issues. Dr. Davis has made several important contributions to a variety of areas including the identification of dietary sources of arsenic exposure in the US population, studying national use of health services over time for nonspecific back pain, and the development of methods to use social media data to measure social support and public opinion. A specific interest of Dr. Davis is the application of data mining methods to healthcare claims data. Funded by the NIH, his current work is investigating health service substitution for nonspecific back pain by conducting a natural experiment of Medicare patients. He received his Masters in Public Health from Dartmouth Medical School and his PhD in quantitative biomedical sciences from Dartmouth College. Dr. Davis’s research has received national media attention on several occasions. Articles about his research have appeared in outlets including Forbes, The Huffington Post, USA Today, Time, The Atlantic, and Consumer Reports. His research has also been featured on NPR’s Marketplace and the Today Show. Pamela Davis-Kean, PhD, is Professor of Psychology, College of Literature, Science, and the Arts, and Research Professor, Survey Research Center and Research Center for Group Dynamics, Institute for Social Research, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Davis-Kean is the Director of the Population, Neurodevelopment, and Genetics program at the Institute for Social Research. This group examines the complex transactions of brain, biology, and behavior as children and families develop across time. She is interested in both micro (brain and biology) and macro (family and socioeconomic conditions) aspects of development to understand the full developmental story of individuals.  Her primary focus in this area is how stress relates to family socioeconomic status and how that translates to parenting beliefs and behaviors that influence the development of children. Melissa DeJonckheere is an adolescent health researcher specializing in qualitative, participatory, and mixed methods research. She is Co-Director of the Mixed Methods Program at the University of Michigan and regularly teaches qualitative and mixed methods research to trainees of all levels. Her research focuses on psychosocial influences on health and well-being, particularly among adolescents with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Dr. DeJonckheere is also interested in improving access to and participation in academic research for youth, students, and trainees who have historically been excluded from science and research experiences. She is program director of MYHealth, a virtual, out-of-school research training program for high school students from southeast Michigan. She has used natural language processing to analyze text data in qualitative and mixed methods studies. She is currently pursuing research related to the use of natural language processing and AI in qualitative and mixed methods research in the health and social sciences. Dr. Dempsey’s research focuses on statistical methods for digital and mobile health. My current work involves three complementary research themes: (1) experimental design and data analytic methods to inform multi-stage decision making in health; (2) statistical modeling of complex longitudinal and survival data; and (3) statistical modeling of complex relational structures such as interaction networks. Current directions include (1) integration of sequential multiple assignment randomized trials (SMARTs) and micro-randomized trials (MRTs) and associated causal inference methods; (2) recurrent event analysis in the presence of high-frequency sensor data; and (3) temporal models for, community detection of, and link prediction using complex interaction data. Use deep learning for sub wavelength imaging, data analysis and nanophotonics design. My research interests are in data-driven sequential decision making and optimization under uncertainty with applications to medicine. I have a cross-appointment in the School of Medicine and I am a member of the Cancer Center and the Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation (IHPI) at University of Michigan. My current research projects are investigating new ways to use longitudinal data to improve decisions related to the using of biomarkers, imaging, and medication for early detection of cancer and prevention of cardiovascular disease. My research interests span topics in Statistical Machine Learning, Computational Social Science, Natural Language Processing, and Field/Digital Experiments. Substantively, I am interested in understanding the impact of internet technologies on users by empirically studying their interactions with such systems. The research questions that I study are of both predictive as well as causal nature and I examine them by using data from text/natural language and social network domains. The same network is displayed, parameterized by four different models of the distribution of influence and susceptibility over nodes, characterized by four types of nodes: low influence and low susceptibility nodes, high influence and low susceptibility nodes, high influence and high susceptibility nodes and low influence and high susceptibility nodes. The optimal seed nodes selected under each model are outlined in green. a, Baseline IC and LT models for which propagation properties are specified as constant (top) and the inverse of node degree (bottom), respectively. b, Baseline IC and LT models for which propagation properties are specified according to the assortative influence, assortative susceptibility, substitute influence–susceptibility (AAS) model. c–e, The same information as in b, but for the assortative influence, disassortative susceptibility, substitute influence–susceptibility (ADS; c), disassortative influence, disassortative susceptibility, substitute influence–susceptibility (DDS; d) and disassortative influence, assortative susceptibility, substitute influence–susceptibility (DAS; e) empirical influence models. Distributions of the frequency of the four types of nodes with different influence and susceptibility characterizations are displayed underneath each graph or model. Seed sets differ substantially across different parameterizations of the graph, implying vastly different influence maximization results for the different models of influence and susceptibility. **This figure is taken from the paper: “Social influence maximization under empirical influence models” by (Aral and Dhillon, Nature Human Behaviour 2018).** MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch, Fall 2021 Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Robust Machine Learning under Distribution Shifts and Shocks: Application to Sustainable Air Quality My lab is primarily interested in how the brain represents, coordinates, and stores memories. Hippocampal neuronal networks generate an assortment of firing patterns that vary depending on the behavior and state of an animal, from active exploration to resting and different stages of sleep. In our lab’s extracellular recordings from large populations of spiking neurons in rodents, we observe state-dependent temporal relationships between activities at multiple timescales. Recent work in my lab is aimed at understanding what role these unique spike patterns play and what they tell us about the function and limitations of different brain states for memory in healthy and compromised animals. To answer these and related questions, we combine behavioral studies of freely moving, learning and exploring rats, multi-channel recordings of the simultaneous electrical (spiking) activity from hundreds of neurons during behavior, sleep and sleep-deprivation, statistical and machine learning tools to uncover deep structure within high-dimensional spike trains, and chemogenetics and optogenetics to manipulate protein signaling and action potentials in specific neural populations in precise time windows. Spike times recorded from a population of hippocampal neurons during running on a maze. What are some of your most interesting projects? Evaluating the impact of sleep loss on hippocampal replay. Using unsupervised machine learning to evaluate the temporal structure of hippocampal firing patterns during sleep. What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? Understand how the hippocampus serves memory and what role sleep plays in this process. What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? The potential for AI models to help explain how the brain works. Dr. Ivo Dinov directs the Statistics Online Computational Resource (SOCR), co-directs the multi-institutional Probability Distributome Project, and is an associate director for education of the Michigan Institute for Data Science (MIDAS). Dr. Dinov is an expert in mathematical modeling, statistical analysis, computational processing and visualization of Big Data. He is involved in longitudinal morphometric studies of human development (e.g., Autism, Schizophrenia), maturation (e.g., depression, pain) and aging (e.g., Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases). Dr. Dinov is developing, validating and disseminating novel technology-enhanced pedagogical approaches for scientific education and active learning. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. Analyzing Big observational data including thousands of Parkinson’s disease patients based on tens-of-thousands signature biomarkers derived from multi-source imaging, genetics, clinical, physiologic, phenomics and demographic data elements is challenging. We are developing Big Data representation strategies, implementing efficient algorithms and introducing software tools for managing, analyzing, modeling and visualizing large, complex, incongruent and heterogeneous data. Such service-oriented platforms and methodological advances enable Big Data Discovery Science and present existing opportunities for learners, educators, researchers, practitioners and policy makers. Kevin J. Dombkowski, DrPH., MS, is Research Professor with the Child Health Evaluation and Research (CHEAR) Center within the University of Michigan Department of Pediatrics.   He is a health services researcher working extensively with public health information systems and large administrative claims databases. Kevin’s primary research focus is conducting population-based interventions aimed at improving the health of children, especially those with chronic conditions.  Much of his work has focused on evaluating the feasibility and accuracy of using administrative claims data to identify children with chronic conditions by linking these data with clinical and public health systems.  Many of these projects have linked claims, immunization registries, newborn screening, birth records and death records to conduct population-based evaluations of health services. He has also applied these approaches to assess the statewide prevalence of chronic conditions such as asthma, sickle cell disease, and inflammatory bowel disease in Michigan as well as other states.  Kevin is currently collaborating with Michigan State University on the design and development of the Flint Registry information architecture. Kevin’s research interests also include registry-based interventions to improve the timeliness of vaccinations through automated reminder and recall systems.  He has led numerous collaborations with the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services (MDHHS), including several CDC-funded initiatives using the Michigan Care Improvement Registry (MCIR).  Through this collaboration, Kevin tested a statewide intervention aimed at increasing influenza vaccination among children with chronic conditions during the 2009 influenza pandemic. Kevin is currently collaborating with MDHHS to evaluate MCIR data quality as immunization providers across Michigan adopt real-time, bi-directional messaging between electronic health records (EHRs) and MCIR.  As PI of a CDC-funded project, Kevin is evaluating the costs and benefits of electronic interoperability between EHRs and MCIR. He is also conducting a statewide evaluation of blood lead testing result data reported by electronic laboratory systems to MDHHS. Accomplishments and Awards The COVID-19 Pandemic and IIS Operations: Opportunities to Move Forward My research aims to empower music and audio creation with machine learning. My long-term goal is to lower the barrier of entry for music composition and democratize audio content creation. I am broadly interested in music generation, audio synthesis, generative AI, multimodal learning, and music information retrieval. I study a wide range of topics centered around Generative AI for Music and Audio, including multitrack music generation, automatic instrumentation, automatic arrangement, automatic harmonization, music performance synthesis, text-queried sound separation, text-to-audio synthesis and symbolic music processing software. Dr. Douville is a critical care anesthesiologist with an investigative background in bioinformatics and perioperative outcomes research. He studies techniques for utilizing health care data, including genotype, to deliver personalized medicine in the perioperative period and intensive care unit. His research background has focused on ways technology can assist health care delivery to improve patient outcomes. This began designing microfluidic chips capable of recreating fluid mechanics of atelectatic alveoli and monitoring the resulting barrier breakdown real-time. His interest in bioinformatics was sparked when he observed how methodology designed for tissue engineering could be modified to the nano-scale to enable genomic analysis. Additionally, his engineering training provided the framework to apply data-driven modeling techniques, such as finite element analysis, to complex biological systems. My lab’s research focuses on understanding computation in large-scale neural circuits through adaptive perturbations and real-time inference. We develop statistical machine learning algorithms to adaptively build models of neural and behavioral data online, and use them for understanding the mapping between multidimensional neural stimulations and complex behavioral outcomes. We emphasize data-driven Bayesian approaches suited for real-time prediction of latent neural and behavioral dynamics. Additional Information How did you end up where you are today? My academic training began in both physics and computer science. My masters work in electrical and computer engineering focused on modeling interconnected resistive systems, and I did my doctoral work in experimental condensed matter physics, focused on the interplay between various quantum phenomena in two-dimensional materials. I am most interested in methods for dissecting complex networked systems, and I ultimately decided to make the switch to neuroscience to study arguably the most complex network around: the brain.v My postdoctoral work focused on automated neural circuit dissection in larval zebrafish, where I designed both mathematical and software tools for experimental integration of machine learning algorithms. As an Assistant Professor, my lab is focused on leveraging increasingly rich behavioral data (in e.g., mice, monkeys) alongside neural data in streaming contexts to causally relate perturbations of neural function and resultant outcomes in latent behavior spaces. My ultimate goal is to bridge the gap between algorithm and implementation, using adaptive methods as a new design language for neuroscience experiments. What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? One of the reasons I decided to move into neuroscience as my application domain was the relatively recent data explosion in the field. We can now record from tens of thousands up to a million neurons simultaneously, at quite high-resolution in time. The field is also increasingly focused on naturalistic and effectively non-repeatable events as behavioral metrics. Both of these items make for incredibly complex and rich problems for neuroscience, which is why I think data science and AI have amazingly interesting roles to play there. Accomplishments and Awards Three U-M researchers named Sloan Research Fellows My work focuses on image-guided medical robots with an emphasis on clinical translation. My interests include medical robotics, biomedical imaging, data visualization, medical device development, and real-time algorithms. A major ongoing project is the development of robotic system for automated eye examination. This system relies on machine learning models for tracking and eventually for interpretation of collected data. Other projects concern the live creation of virtual reality scenes from volumetric imaging modalities like optical coherence tomography and efficient acquisition strategies for such purposes. Karthik Duraisamy, PhD, is Associate Professor of Aerospace Engineering in the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Duraisamy’s group focuses on data-driven modeling of computational physics problems. Specifically, we use statistical inversion and physics-informed machine learning techniques to augment existing computational models. Another focus area is formal reduced order modeling using data-driven decompositions. Our application areas are in turbulence, combustion and materials physics. Turbulent flow in a trailing vortex. My work focuses on decision-making models and algorithms for enhancing planning, operation, and pricing in electric power systems with substantial renewable energy integration and rising AI-driven electricity demand. This involves developing prescriptive analytics—such as decision-focused and physics-informed machine learning models—to manage grid uncertainties, building large-scale equilibrium models to analyze interactions among AI users in the grid, and investigating possible biases arising from machine learning applications in electricity markets. To enable this work on proprietary and sensitive datasets, I develop privacy-preserving algorithms for energy analytics and data synthesis from real-world infrastructure systems using mathematical optimization and differential privacy. My primary research interests are understanding the causes and consequences of biased selection and attention to persuasive information, particularly in the context of health promotion. Simply stated, I am interested in what we pay attention to and why, and how this attention (or inattention) influences attitudinal and behavioral outcomes, such as persuasion and healthy behavior. In particular, my work has addressed disparities in attention to information about HIV prevention for African-Americans compared to European-Americans as a predictor of disparities in health outcomes. I am also exploring barriers to attention to health information by African-Americans, including the roles of stigma, shame, fear, and perceptions of irrelevance. At a more basic attitudes and persuasion level, I am currently pursuing work relevant to how we select information for liked versus disliked others, and how the role of choice influences how we process information we agree versus disagree with. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Measuring Racial Disparity in the Language of Physician-Patient Interactions Societal control tends to be implemented from the top-down, whether that is a private corporation or a communist state. How can data science empower from the bottom-up? Computational technologies can be designed to replace extractive economies with generative cycles. My research includes AI for the artisanal economy; computational modeling of Indigenous practices; and other means for putting the power of data science in the service of generative justice. Student moving from her knowledge of braiding algorithms, to her program for braiding patterns, to a mannequin head for installation in adult braider’s shops. Cornrow Curves CSDT My research is focused on developing and using identifiability and parameter estimation methods in mathematical modeling to generate insights into disease mechanisms, forecasting, and intervention design. My work blends mathematics, statistics, and epidemiology to both develop new methods and theory and to translate this theory to directly improve population health. Dr. Eisenberg studies infectious disease epidemiology with a focus on waterborne pathogens. His expertise are in the areas of water sanitation and hygiene (WASH), quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA) and disease transmission modeling. Dr. Eisenberg has a long-standing research platform in northern coastal Ecuador, examining how changes in the social and natural environments, mediated by road construction, affect the epidemiology of enteric pathogens. Specific studies focus on enteric pathogens, antimicrobial resistance, the microbiome and dengue. He is also The NIGMS consortium, Models of Infectious Disease Agent Study (MIDAS), to examine mechanisms of transmission and potential intervention and control of enteric pathogens through water and sanitation interventions. Our lab’s research interests are in the areas of oncology bioinformatics, multimodality image analysis, and treatment outcome modeling. We operate at the interface of physics, biology, and engineering with the primary motivation to design and develop novel approaches to unravel cancer patients’ response to chemoradiotherapy treatment by integrating physical, biological, and imaging information into advanced mathematical models using combined top-bottom and bottom-top approaches that apply techniques of machine learning and complex systems analysis to first principles and evaluating their performance in clinical and preclinical data. These models could be then used to personalize cancer patients’ chemoradiotherapy treatment based on predicted benefit/risk and help understand the underlying biological response to disease. These research interests are divided into the following themes: Bioinformatics: design and develop large-scale datamining methods and software tools to identify robust biomarkers (-omics) of chemoradiotherapy treatment outcomes from clinical and preclinical data. Multimodality image-guided targeting and adaptive radiotherapy: design and develop hardware tools and software algorithms for multimodality image analysis and understanding, feature extraction for outcome prediction (radiomics), real-time treatment optimization and targeting. Radiobiology: design and develop predictive models of tumor and normal tissue response to radiotherapy. Investigate the application of these methods to develop therapeutic interventions for protection of normal tissue toxicities. Michael Elliott is Professor of Biostatistics at the University of Michigan School of Public Health and Research Scientist at the Institute for Social Research. Dr. Elliott’s statistical research interests focus around the broad topic of “missing data,” including the design and analysis of sample surveys, casual and counterfactual inference, and latent variable models. He has worked closely with collaborators in injury research, pediatrics, women’s health, and the social determinants of physical and mental health. Dr. Elliott serves as an Associate Editor for the Journal of the American Statistical Association. He is currently serving as a co-investigator on the MIDAS-affiliated Reinventing Urban Transportation and Mobility project, working to develop methods to improve the representativeness of naturalistic driving data. • Computational dynamics focused on nonlinear dynamics and finite elements (e.g., a new approach for forecasting bifurcations/tipping points in aeroelastic and ecological systems, new finite element methods for thin walled beams that leads to novel reduced order models). • Modeling nonlinear phenomena and mechano-chemical processes in molecular motor dynamics, such as motor proteins, toward early detection of neurodegenerative diseases. • Computational methods for robotics, manufacturing, modeling multi-body dynamics, developed methods for identifying limit cycle oscillations in large-dimensional (fluid) systems. • Turbomachinery and aeroelasticity providing a better understanding of fundamental complex fluid dynamics and cutting-edge models for predicting, identifying and characterizing the response of blisks and flade systems through integrated experimental &amp; computational approaches. • Structural health monitoring &amp; sensing providing increased sensibility / capabilities by the discovery, characterization and exploitation of sensitivity vector fields, smart system interrogation through nonlinear feedback excitation, nonlinear minimal rank perturbation and system augmentation, pattern recognition for attractors, damage detection using bifurcation morphing. Accomplishments and Awards Digitally Engineering the Future of Army Off-Road Autonomous Vehicles U-M’s Automotive Research Center gets $100 million through 2028 I have been creating free and interactive ebooks for introductory computing courses on the open-source Ruenstone platform and analyzing the clickstream data from those courses to improve the ebooks and instruction. In particular, I am interested in using educational data mining to close the feedback loop and improve the instructional materials. I am also interested in learner sourcing to automatically generate and improve assessments. I have been applying principles from educational psychology such as worked examples plus low cognitive load practice to improve instruction. I have been exploring mixed-up code (Parsons) problems as one type of practice. I created two types of adaptation for Parsons problems: intra-problem and inter-problem. In intra-problem adaptation, if the learner is struggling to solve the current problem it can dynamically be made easier. In inter-problem adaptation the difficulty of the next problem is based on the learner’s performance on the previous problem. I study cybercrime using data-driven methods to analyze, characterize, and measure the infrastructure and modus operandi used by criminal activities on the Internet. In particular, I focus on collection, analysis, and semantic characterization of cyber threat intelligence that comes in many shapes and forms (e.g., natural language, network traffic, system audit logs). The ultimate goal is to learn insights that will inform decisions on building robust defense against online criminal activities that involve threats such as ransomware, exploit kits, and botnets. To achieve these goals, I find graph theory and analytics, machine learning (deep learning), longitudinal analysis, and causality inference to be the natural methods. I also study the training and deployment of cyber threat classification/prediction systems in adversarial settings. From behavioral fingerprinting and detection of cybercrime toolkits to analytics and detection of online cyber threats; from semantic characterization of cyber threat intelligence to detection and forensics of advanced cyber attacks, machine learning, graph theory and analytics, graph isomorphism, and causal inference serve as the core ingredients to build robust defense against cyber threats. August (Gus) Evrard is Arthur F. Thurnau Professor in the departments of Physics and Astronomy, and the Michigan Center for Theoretical Physics. He serves as Associate Director for Community Engagement with ARC. Professor Evrard is a computational cosmologist who models the formation and evolution of large-scale cosmic structure. He currently co-leads the Simulation Working Group for the US-led Dark Energy Survey and is a member of the XMM-XXL project and Virgo Consortium based in Europe. His research uses N-body and hydrodynamic methods to study the formation of galaxies and clusters of galaxies. The simulations also produce synthetic expectations for astronomical sky surveys, providing truth tables that are essential for verifying data handling and statistical processing methods applied to survey data to study the nature of dark matter and dark energy. Professor Evrard was named a Fellow of the American Physical Society in 2011 and an ORCID Ambassador in 2013. He is active in instructional technology at Michigan, founding the Academic Reporting Tool service in use since 2006 and Problem Roulette, a cloud-based study service that offers random, topical access to old exam questions for students in introductory physics classes. Tayo Fabusuyi is an assistant research scientist in the Human Factors Group at UMTRI. His research interests are in Urban Systems and Operations Research, specifically designing and implementing initiatives that support sustainable and resilient communities with a focus on efficiency and equity issues. Drawing on both quantitative and qualitative data, his research develops and applies hard and soft Operations Research methods to urban systems issues in a manner that emphasizes theory driven solutions with demonstrated value-added. A central theme of his research activities is the use of demand side interventions, via information and pricing strategies in influencing the public’s travel behavior with the objective of achieving more beneficial societal outcomes. Informed by the proliferation of big data and the influence of transportation in the urban sphere, these research activities are categorized broadly into three overlapping and interdependent areas – intelligent transportation systems (ITS), emerging mobility services and urban futures . Before joining the research faculty at UMTRI, Dr. Fabusuyi was a Planning Economist at the African Development Bank and an adjunct Economics faculty member at Carnegie Mellon University, where he received his Ph.D. in Engineering and Public Policy. We conduct research to analyze breath from patients in order to diagnose and monitor diseases. We also develop imaging modalities to analyze tissues for cancer diagnosis My core research focuses on the politics and measurement of human rights, discrimination, violence, and repression. I use computational methods to understand why governments around the world torture, maim, and kill individuals within their jurisdiction and the processes monitors use to observe and document these abuses. Other projects cover a broad array of themes but share a focus on computationally intensive methods and research design. These methodological tools, essential for analyzing data at massive scale, open up new insights into the micro-foundations of state repression and the politics of measurement. People rely more on strong ties for job help in countries with greater inequality. Coefficients from 55 regressions of job transmission on tie strength are compared to measures of inequality (Gini coefficient), mean income per capita, and population, all measured in 2013. Gray lines indicate 95% confidence regions from 1000 simulated regressions that incorporate uncertainty in the country-level regressions (see below for more details). In each simulated regression we draw each country point from the distribution of regression coefficients implied by the estimate and standard error for that country and measure of tie strength. P values indicate the simulated probability that there is no relationship between tie strength and the other variable. Laura K. Gee, Jason J. Jones, Christopher J. Fariss, Moira Burke, and James H. Fowler. “The Paradox of Weak Ties in 55 Countries” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 133:362-372 (January 2017) DOI:10.1016/j.jebo.2016.12.004 Dr. Farzaneh’s research interest centers on the application of computer science, in particular, machine learning, signal processing, and computer vision, to develop clinical decision support systems and solve medical problems. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Improving Cardiovascular Disease Detection with a Novel Multi-label Classifier for Electrocardiograms: Capturing Label Uncertainty and Complex Hierarchical Relationships between Output Classes Today’s real-world problems are complex and large, often with overwhelmingly large number of unknown variables which render them doomed to the so-called “curse of dimensionality”. For instance, in energy systems, the system operators should solve optimal power flow, unit commitment, and transmission switching problems with tens of thousands of continuous and discrete variables in real time. In control systems, a long standing question is how to efficiently design structured and distributed controllers for large-scale and unknown dynamical systems. Finally, in machine learning, it is important to obtain simple, interpretable, and parsimonious models for high-dimensional and noisy datasets. Our research is motivated by two main goals: (1) to model these problems as tractable optimization problems; and (2) to develop structure-aware and scalable computational methods for these optimization problems that come equipped with certifiable optimality guarantees. We aim to show that exploiting hidden structures in these problems—such as graph-induced or spectral sparsity—is a key game-changer in the pursuit of massively scalable and guaranteed computational methods. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. My research lies at the intersection of optimization, data analytics, and control. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: IPODS: Innovative and Powerful Optimization Methods for Data Science with Statistical Guarantees My research examines how people make choices in uncertain environments. The general focus is on using statistical models to explain complex decision patterns, particularly involving sequential choices among related items (e.g., brands in the same category) and dyads (e.g., people choosing one another in online dating), as well as a variety of applications to problems in the marketing domain (e.g., models relating advertising exposures to awareness and sales). The main methods used lie primarily in discrete choice models, ordinarily estimated using Bayesian methods, dynamic programming, and nonparametrics. I’m particularly interested in extending Bayesian analysis to very large databases, especially in terms of ‘fusing’ data sets with only partly overlapping covariates to enable strong statistical identification of models across them. Applying Bayesian Methods to Problems in Dynamic Choice Dr. Feng’s research involves conducting and using naturalistic observational studies to better understand the interactions between motorists and other road users including bicyclists and pedestrians. The goal is to use an evidence-based, data-driven approach that improves bicycling and walking safety and ultimately makes them viable mobility options. A naturalistic study is a valuable and unique research method that provides continuous, high-time-resolution, rich, and objective data about how people drive/ride/walk for their everyday trips in the real world. It also faces challenges from the sheer volume of the data, and as with all observational studies, there are potential confounding factors compared to a randomized laboratory experiment. Data analytic methods can be developed to interpret the behavioral data, make meaningful inferences, and get actionable insights. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. Using naturalistic driving data to examine the interactions between motorists and bicyclists Dr. Fernandez is a clinical psychologist with extensive training in both addiction and behavioral medicine. She is the Clinical Program Director at the University of Michigan Addiction Treatment Service. Her research focuses on the intersection of addiction and health across two main themes: 1) Expanding access to substance use disorder treatment and prevention services particularly in healthcare settings and; 2) applying precision health approaches to addiction-related healthcare questions. Her current grant-funded research includes an NIH-funded randomized controlled pilot trial of a preoperative alcohol intervention, an NIH-funded precision health study to leverage electronic health records to identify high-risk alcohol use at the time of surgery using natural language processing and other machine-learning based approaches, a University of Michigan funded precision health award to understand and prevent new persistent opioid use after surgery using prediction modeling, and a federally-funded evaluation of the state of Michigan’s substance use disorder treatment expansion. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Equitable Models for Persistent Opioid Use Prediction and Personalization My research group develops models and algorithms for large-scale inverse problems, especially image reconstruction for X-ray CT and MRI. The models include those based on sparsity using dictionaries learned from large-scale data sets. Developing efficient and accurate methods for dictionary learning is a recent focus. To see how model-based image reconstruction methods lead to improved image quality and/or lower X-ray doses, see: http://web.eecs.umich.edu/~fessler/rehttp://web.eecs.umich.edu/~fessler/result/ct/ Thomas Finholt is the Dean and Professor of Information at the School of Information. His current research focuses on: the energy costs of forming and maintaining social ties; computational mediation of trust in virtual organizations; and use of ultra-resolution collaboration environments. My research tackles how human values can be incorporated into machine learning and other computational systems. This includes work on the translation process from human values to computational definitions and work on how to understand and encourage fairness while preventing discrimination in machine learning and data science. My research combines tools from the theory of machine learning with insights from economics, science and technology studies, and philosophy, among others, to improve our theories of the translation process and the algorithms we create. In settings like classification, social networks, and data markets, I explore the ways in which human values play a primary role in the quality of machine learning and data science. The likelihood of receiving desirable information like public health information or job advertisements depends on both your position in a social network, and on who directly gets the information to start with (the seeds). This image shows how a new method for deciding who to select as the seeds, called maximin, outperforms the most popular approach in previous literature by decreasing the correlation between where you are in the social network and your likelihood of receiving the information. These figures are taken from work by Benjamin Fish, Ashkan Bashardoust, danah boyd, Sorelle A. Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. Gaps in information access in social networks. In The World Wide Web Conference, WWW 2019, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 13-17, 2019, pages 480–490, 2019. As faculty member within the University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, Dr. Flannagan currently serves as Director of the Center for Management of Information for Safe and Sustainable Transportation (CMISST) and Head of the Statistics and Methods Group for the CDC-funded UM Injury Center. Dr. Flannagan has over 20 years of experience conducting data analysis and research on injury risk related to motor vehicle crashes and was responsible for the development of a model of injury outcome that allows side-by-side comparison of public health, vehicle, roadway and post-crash interventions (utmost.umtri.umich.edu). She has also applied statistical methods to understanding and evaluating benefits of crash-avoidance technologies, including evaluating safety in automated vehicles, and works to develop novel applications of statistics to analysis of driving data. Her current work with CMISST involves the fusion and analysis of large state-level crash databases, which are useful in analyzing the effect of a variety of countermeasures on crash involvement and injury risk. In addition, her group is working to make data available to researchers to expand the community of experts in transportation data analysis. Q & A with Dr. Carol Flannagan Q:  When in your career did you realize that data (broadly speaking) could open a lot of doors, in terms of research? I have loved data analysis since my undergraduate Experimental Design course sophomore year when I learned about analysis of 2X2 tables. Beyond that, I didn’t necessarily see it as a career move or a research program. It was much later at UMTRI, when I started thinking about how much data we had scattered around the building and how great it would be to round up those data and share them, that I though explicitly about data per se as opening research doors. In 2010, I was asked to head up the Transportation Data Center at UMTRI. In spite of its name, the group was doing very limited things with crash data at the time. After a few years, the group got a new name and some support to grow from UMOR. That, along with a number of research projects over the years, has led to our current incarnation with substantially upgraded data hosting for the state of Michigan’s crash data and strong capabilities in data analysis of all kinds of newer transportation data. For example, we have collaborated with the Engineering Systems group, GM and OnStar to conduct a series of studies funded by NHTSA to analyze driver response to crash avoidance systems using OnStar data on a large scale. With the MIDAS transportation project, we are moving forward on several fronts. Most importantly, we are developing a high-performance data access and processing system to handle the large driving datasets that UMTRI has collected (and continues to collect). This system can integrate automated video processing with analysis and/or querying of time series data (e.g., speed, acceleration, etc.). For my group, this new capability opens new doors in both data sharing and data analysis. Q: How has the field, and specifically the use of “Big Data,” changed during your career? Wow… My first analyses as an undergrad were computed by hand as a matter of course. In grad school, since we needed to access terminals to use MTS (the Michigan Terminal System), it was often faster to just do it by hand (using a calculator and paper and pencil). What that meant is that computation was a true limitation on how much data could be analyzed. Even after personal computers were a regular fixture in research (and at home), computation of any size (e.g., more subjects or more variables) was still slow. My dissertation included a simulation component and I used to set simulations running every night before I went to bed. The simulation would finish around 2-3 a.m., and the computer would suddenly turn on, sending bright light into the room and waking my husband and me up. Those simulations can all be done in minutes or seconds now. Imagine how much more I could have done with current systems! In the last 5 years, I’ve gotten much more involved in analysis of driving data to understand benefits of crash avoidance systems. We are often searching these data for extracts that contain certain kinds of situations that are relevant to such systems (e.g., hard braking events related to forward collision warnings). This is one use of Big Data—to observe enough that you can be sure of finding examples of what you’re interested in. However, in the last year or two, I have been more involved in full-dataset analyses, large-scale triggered data collection, and large-scale kinematic simulations. These are all enabled by faster computing and because of that, we can find richer answers to more questions. Q: What role does your association with MIDAS play in this continuing development? One of the advantages of being associated with MIDAS is that it gives me access to faculty who are interested in data as opposed to transportation. It’s not that I need other topic areas, but I often find that when I listen to data and methods talks in totally different content areas, I can see how those methods could apply to problems I care about. For example, the challenge grant in the social sciences entitled “Computational Approaches for the Construction of Novel Macroeconomic Data,” is tackling a problem for economists that transportation researchers share. That is, how do you help researchers who may not have deep technical skill in data querying get at extracts from very large, complex datasets easily? Advances that they make in that project could be transferred to transportation datasets, which share many of the characteristics of social-media datasets. Another advantage is the access to students who are in data-oriented programs (e.g., statistics, data science, computer science, information, etc.) who want real-world experiences using their skills. I have had a number of data science students reach out to me and worked closely with two of them on independent studies where we worked together on Big Data analysis problems in transportation. One was related to measuring and tracking vehicle safety in automated vehicles and the other was in text mining of a complaints dataset to try to find failure patterns that might indicate the presence of a vehicle defect. Q: What are the next research challenges for transportation generally and your work specifically? Transportation is in the midst of a once-in-a-lifetime transformation. In my lifetime, I expect to be driven to the senior center and my gerontologist appointments by what amounts to a robot (on wheels). Right now, I’m working on research problems that will help bring that to fruition. Data science is absolutely at the core of that transformation and the problems are wide open. I’m particularly concerned that our research datasets need to be managed in a way that opens them to a broad audience where we support both less technical interactions (e.g., data extracts with a very simple querying system) and much more technical interactions (e.g., full-dataset automatic video processing to identify drivers using cell phones in face video). I’m also interested in new and efficient large-scale data collection methods, particularly those based on the idea of “smart” or triggered sampling rather than just acquisition of huge datasets “because the information I want is somewhere in there…if only I can find it…” My own work has mostly been about safety, and although we envision a future without traffic fatalities (or ideally without crashes), the current fatality count has gone up over the past couple of years. Thus, I spend time analyzing crash data for new insights into changes in safety over time and even how the economy influences fatality counts. Much of my work is for the State of Michigan around predicting how many fatalities there will be in the next few years and identifying the benefits and potential benefits of various interventions. My web tool, UTMOST, (the Unified Theory Mapping Opportunities for Safety Technologies ) allows visualization of the benefits, or potential benefits, of many different kinds of interventions, including public health policy, vehicle technology, and infrastructure improvements. I think this kind of integrated approach will be necessary to achieve the goal of zero fatalities over the next 20 years. Finally, a significant part of my research program will continue to be development and use of statistical methods to measure, predict, and understand safety in transportation. How can we tell if AVs are safer than humans? What should future traffic safety data systems look like? How can we integrate data systems (e.g., crash and injury outcome) to better understand safety and figure out how to prioritize countermeasure development? How can machine learning and other big data statistical tools help us make the most of driving data? I manage research activities for the College and Beyond II study at ICPSR, including survey development and data infrastructure planning. My research broadly focuses on issues of postsecondary access and success for undergraduate and graduate students and uses quantitative methodologies. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Classifying the Content of Undergraduate Course-taking at Scale Dr. Fleischer’s research focuses on how the broader socioeconomic and policy environments impact health disparities and the health of vulnerable populations, in the U.S. and around the world. Through this research, her group employs various analytic techniques to examine data at multiple levels (country-level, state-level, and neighborhood-level), emphasizing the role of structural influences on individual health. Her group applies advanced epidemiologic, statistical, and econometric methods to this research, including survey methodology, longitudinal data analysis, hierarchical modeling, causal inference, systems science, and difference-in-difference analysis. Dr. Fleischer leads two NCI-funded projects focused on the impact of tobacco control policies on health equity in the U.S. I study medication prescription information and work on teams that create and evaluate applications of natural language processing to medication prescription information. The main thrust of my research in pharmacy informatics focuses on automating subtasks that pertain to medication prescribing by clinicians and medication prescription review by pharmacists. In addition, I work with the Knowledge Systems Lab in the Department of Learning Health Sciences to specify model repository requirements for making AI/ML models findable, accessible. interoperable, and reusable. Daniel Forger is a Professor in the Department of Mathematics. He is devoted to understanding biological clocks. He uses techniques from many fields, including computer simulation, detailed mathematical modeling and mathematical analysis, to understand biological timekeeping. His research aims to generate predictions that can be experimentally verified. I am a gerontechnologist and mixed-methodologist. My work examines how emerging technology use, such as virtual reality, may impact the overall health and well-being of the older adult community. With an emphasis on social connectivity, I develop technological interventions designed to promote independence and mitigate the negative consequences of social isolation. A primary consideration in the research I perform is how the digital divide may impact my participants from realizing the true benefits of technology and how to bridge that gap. In May of 2024, I received a K01 award from the National Institute on Aging (1K01AG083120-01A1). In fulfillment of this award I am currently developing a comprehensive training program to build new skills and to explore how VR may reduce the pressing risk of ADRD among older adults who live alone. My study, entitled “Virtual Convoys: A Social VR Approach to Reducing ADRD risk among Older Adults Living Alone,” will contribute to our understanding of the social determinants of cognitive health and the potential for emerging technologies such as VR to promote independent aging. I will conduct feasibility and acceptability testing of a multimodal, social VR study that will target social and interpersonal processes as promoted and facilitated by VR immersion and interactivity, which have been shown to benefit cognition. The goal is to identify the mechanisms of social VR that may promote and sustain social interaction among older adults who might be at risk for social isolation and ultimately ADRD. The feasibility and acceptability studies will be conducted in the Institute for Social Research’s HomeLab under the mentorship of Drs. Toni Antonucci, Richard Gonzalez, Elaine Wethington, and Mark Newman. Edgar Franco-Vivanco is an Assistant Professor of Political Science and a faculty associate at the Center for Political Studies. His research interests include Latin American politics, historical political economy, criminal violence, and indigenous politics. Prof. Franco-Vivanco is interested in implementing machine learning tools to improve the analysis of historical data, in particular handwritten documents. He is also working in the application of text analysis to study indigenous languages. In a parallel research agenda, he explores how marginalized communities interact with criminal organizations and abusive policing in Latin America. As part of this research, he is using NLP tools to identify different types of criminal behavior. Examples of the digitization process of handwritten documents from colonial Mexico. Accomplishments and Awards Center for Political Studies hosts ‘The 2024 Mexican Elections in Context’ event at Michigan Union Exploring properties of spatial-econometric methods for valid estimation of interdependent processes, i.e., estimation of spatially & spatiotemporally dynamic responses, primarily in political science and political economy applications. Specific applications have included international tax-competition and national tax & other economic policies, U.S. inter-state policy diffusion, the (possibly contagious) spread of intra- and inter-state conflict. I conduct a broad range of research on health policy and health economics focused on children. I will be launching a program on child health equity in the fall of 2020. Fujisaki-Manome’s research program aims to improve predictability of hazardous weather, ice, and lake/ocean events in cold regions in order to support preparedness and resilience in coastal communities, as well as improve the usability of their forecast products by working with stakeholders. The main question Fujisaki-Manome’s research aims to address is: what are the impacts of interactions between ice and oceans / ice and lakes on larger scale phenomena, such as climate, weather, storm surges, and sea/lake ice melting? Fujisaki-Manome primarily uses numerical geophysical modeling and machine learning to address the research question; and scientific findings from the research feed back into the models and improve their predictability. Her work has focused on applications to the Great Lakes, the Alaska’s coasts, Arctic Ocean, and the Sea of Okhotsk. View MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch, Fall 2021 . Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Supporting Decision-making for a Vital Waterway in the Great Lakes by Machine Learning Model-based Lake Ice Forecasting Climate Crisis: Record Low 3% Great Lakes Ice Coverage during Usual Peak Period Urine-to-fertilizer effort part of NSF Regional Innovation Engine Johann Gagnon-Bartsch, PhD, is Assistant Professor of Statistics in the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Gagnon-Bartsch’s research currently focuses on the analysis of high-throughput biological data as well as other types of high-dimensional data. More specifically, he is working with collaborators on developing methods that can be used when the data are corrupted by systematic measurement errors of unknown origin, or when the data suffer from the effects of unobserved confounders. For example, gene expression data suffer from both systematic measurement errors of unknown origin (due to uncontrolled variations in laboratory conditions) and the effects of unobserved confounders (such as whether a patient had just eaten before a tissue sample was taken). They are developing methodology that is able to correct for these systematic errors using “negative controls.” Negative controls are variables that (1) are known to have no true association with the biological signal of interest, and (2) are corrupted by the systematic errors, just like the variables that are of interest. The negative controls allow us to learn about the structure of the errors, so that we may then remove the errors from the other variables. Microarray data from tissue samples taken from three different regions of the brain (anterior cingulate cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and cerebellum) of ten individuals. The 30 tissue samples were separately analyzed in three different laboratories (UC Davis, UC Irvine, U of Michigan). The left plot shows the first two principal components of the data. The data cluster by laboratory, indicating that most of the variation in the data is systematic error that arises due to uncontrolled variation in laboratory conditions. The second plot shows the data after adjustment. The data now cluster by brain region (cortex vs. cerebellum). The data is from GEO (GSE2164). Andrzej Galecki, MD, PhD, is Research Professor in the department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, and Research Professor in the Institute of Gerontology at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. My research interest lies in applying data science for actionable transformation of human health from the bench to bedside. Current research focus areas include cutting edge single-cell sequencing informatics and genomics; precision medicine through integration of multi-omics data types; novel modeling and computational methods for biomarker research; public health genomics. I apply my biomedical informatics and analytical expertise to study diseases such as cancers, as well the impact of pregnancy/early life complications on later life diseases. Accomplishments and Awards 11 reasons why we’ve stayed in academia The Computational Materials Physics group under the direction of Vikram Gavini focuses on developing computational frameworks and algorithms to enable large-scale ab-initio calculations for predictive materials simulations. The two main present thrusts of the group since 2020 are: (i) Developing fast and accurate large-scale density functional theory (DFT) calculations; (ii) Development of a computational framework for improving the accuracy of DFT calculations by improving the exchange-correlation description with an aim to advance the accuracy towards quantum accuracy. DFT-FE a massively parallel and GPU ported real-space DFT code based on finite-element discretization originated from this group. The group is focused on data-driven approaches to improve the exchange-correlation description in DFT as well as accelerate predictive atomistic calculations. Dr. Gaynanova’s research focuses on the development of statistical methods for analysis of modern high-dimensional biomedical data. Her methodological interests are in data integration, machine learning and high-dimensional statistics, motivated by challenges arising in analyses of multi-omics data (e.g., RNASeq, metabolomics, micribiome) and data from wearable devices (continuous glucose monitors, ambulatory blood pressure monitors, activity trackers).Dr. Gaynanova’s research has been funded by the National Science Foundation, and recognized with a David P. Byar Young Investigator Award and an NSF CAREER Award. She currently serves as an Associate Editor for Journal of the American Statistical Association, Biometrika and Data Science in Science. Analysis of a large corpus of student writing in response to concept-focused prompts. Data includes drafts, peer feedback, and revisions for each of approximately 60,000 document and 180,000 pieces of feedback. The goal is to use tools of natural language processing to develop the capacity to provide students and faculty with feedback that will foster deeper conceptual learning among students and enhanced pedagogy among faculty. The Computational Autonomy and Robotics Laboratory (CURLY) at the University of Michigan develops novel algorithms for mobile robots concerning multimodal perception, learning, autonomous navigation, exploration, and environmental monitoring. My research focuses on using digital health solutions, signal processing, machine learning and ecological momentary assessment to understand the physiological and psychological determinants of symptoms in patients with atrial fibrillation. I am building a research framework for rich data collection using smartphone apps, medical records and wearable sensors. I believe that creating a multidimensional dataset to study atrial fibrillation will yield important insights and serve as model for studying all chronic medical conditions. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Improving Cardiovascular Disease Detection with a Novel Multi-label Classifier for Electrocardiograms: Capturing Label Uncertainty and Complex Hierarchical Relationships between Output Classes Eric Gilbert is the John Derby Evans Associate Professor in the School of Information—and a Professor in CSE—at the University of Michigan. Before coming to Michigan, he led the comp.social lab at Georgia Tech. Dr. Gilbert is a sociotechnologist, with a research focus on building and studying social media systems. His work has been supported by grants from Facebook, Samsung, Yahoo!, Google, NSF, ARL, and DARPA. Dr. Gilbert’s work has been recognized with multiple best paper awards, as well as covered by outlets including Wired, NPR and The New York Times. He is the recipient of an NSF CAREER award and the Sigma Xi Young Faculty Award. Professor Gilbert holds a BS in Math &amp; CS and a PhD in CS—both from from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Brenda Gillespie, PhD, is Associate Director in Consulting for Statistics, Computing and Analytics Research (CSCAR) with a secondary appointment as Associate Research Professor in the department of Biostatistics in the School of Public Health at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. She provides statistical collaboration and support for numerous research projects at the University of Michigan. She teaches Biostatistics courses as well as CSCAR short courses in survival analysis, regression analysis, sample size calculation, generalized linear models, meta-analysis, and statistical ethics. Her major areas of expertise are clinical trials and survival analysis. Prof. Gillespie’s research interests are in the area of censored data and clinical trials. One research interest concerns the application of categorical regression models to the case of censored survival data. This technique is useful in modeling the hazard function (instead of treating it as a nuisance parameter, as in Cox proportional hazards regression), or in the situation where time-related interactions (i.e., non-proportional hazards) are present. An investigation comparing various categorical modeling strategies is currently in progress. Another area of interest is the analysis of cross-over trials with censored data. Brenda has developed (with M. Feingold) a set of nonparametric methods for testing and estimation in this setting. Our methods out-perform previous methods in most cases. Pamela Giustinelli, is an Adjunct Research Assistant Professor in the Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Pamela is interested in modeling, empirical, and counterfactual policy analysis of individual and multilateral decision making under uncertainty-ambiguity, especially as it applies to the family and human capital contexts. She is also interested in survey methodology, particularly as it relates to this line of research. Here are some important questions in her research agenda: How do preferences, beliefs, choice sets, and other elements of a choice situation determine what choices people make and also how they make those choices? (That is, the “decision rules,” “decision protocols,” or “modes of interactions” they use.) And how are those elements formed? What information do individuals and groups have or use when making decisions under uncertainty? And what information is or is not shared among decision makers in multilateral settings? What are the implications of the above points for policy? To inform modeling, identification, and prediction of choice behaviors, what components of individuals’ and groups’ decision processes can we sensibly measure in surveys? From whom? And in what formats? Data science methodology : Survey design for elicitation of components of human decision processes and interactions under uncertainty/ambiguity Data science applications : Human capital (school choice, labor supply, end-of-life living arrangements) Sharon Glotzer, PhD, is the Anthony C. Lembke Department Chair of Chemical Engineering, the John Werner Cahn Distinguished University Professor of Engineering, and the Stuart W. Churchill Collegiate Professor of Chemical Engineering, in the College of Engineering, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Glotzer and her group are focused on the new revolution in nano-science, engineering and technology is being driven by our ability to manipulate matter at the molecular, nanoparticle, and colloidal level to create “designer” structures. The Glotzer group uses computer simulation to discover the fundamental principles of how nanoscale systems of building blocks self-assemble, and to discover how to control the assembly process to engineer new materials. By mimicking biological assembly, we are exploring ways to nano-engineer materials that are self-assembling, self-sensing, and self-regulating. The group is developing theory and molecular simulation tools to understand these materials, and elucidate the nature of supercooled liquids, glasses, and crystallization. The Glotzer group develops in-house, open-source software for simulation, data analysis, and more. We invite the scientific community to learn more and utilize our software . Accomplishments and Awards DNA becomes our ‘hands’ to construct advanced polyhedral nanoparticles I am a theoretical astrophysicist studying the origins and structure of galaxies in the universe. My research focuses on developing more realistic gasdynamics simulations, starting with the initial conditions that are well constrained by observations, and advancing them in time with high spatial resolution using adaptive mesh refinement. I use machine-learning techniques to compare simulation predictions with observational data. Such comparison leads to insights about the underlying physics that governs the formation of stars and galaxies. I have developed a Computational Astrophysics course that teaches practical application of modern techniques for big-data analysis and model fitting. Emergence of galaxies and star clusters in cosmological gasdynamics simulations. Left panel shows large-scale cosmic structure (density of dark matter particles), which formed by gravitational instability. In the middle panel we can resolve this structure into disk galaxies with complex morphology (density of molecular/red and atomic/blue gas). These galaxies should create massive star clusters, such as shown in the right panel (real image — to be reproduced by our future simulations!). I am interested in using digital health technology for the treatment of cardiovascular disease with a particular emphasis on its application to patients with heart failure. More specific, my interests include (1) using non-invasive sensors and digital health technology to improve the delivery of cardiovascular care and (2) optimizing treatment for patients with advanced systolic heart failure through novel statistical tools and risk-modeling Accomplishments and Awards Fitness forward: Wearable tech puts heart health in your hands Bryan R. Goldsmith, PhD, is Assistant Professor in the department of Chemical Engineering within the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Goldsmith’s research group utilizes first-principles modeling (e.g., density-functional theory and wave function based methods), molecular simulation, and data analytics tools (e.g., compressed sensing, kernel ridge regression, and subgroup discovery) to extract insights of catalysts and materials for sustainable chemical and energy production and to help create a platform for their design. For example, the group has exploited subgroup discovery as a data-mining approach to help find interpretable local patterns, correlations, and descriptors of a target property in materials-science data.  They also have been using compressed sensing techniques to find physically meaningful models that predict the properties of perovskite (ABX3) compounds. Prof. Goldsmith’s areas of research encompass energy research, materials science, nanotechnology, physics, and catalysis. A computational prediction for a group of gold nanoclusters (global model) could miss patterns unique to nonplaner clusters (subgroup 1) or planar clusters (subgroup 2). Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Interpretable Machine Learning for Identifying Descriptors of Catalysts for Chemical Conversion My research is primarily in the use of wearable technologies in the ambulatory setting to evaluate the role of sleep and circadian rhythms in health (including during pregnancy) and chronic disease (multiple sclerosis, gastrointestinal). What are some of your most interesting projects? My most interesting project was a collaboration with mathematics (Drs. Walch and Forger). We developed algorithms to model sleep and circadian phase and tested the predictions against gold-standard polysomnogram and dim light melatonin onset. We were the first group to develop our own sleep classifier adapted for use on an off the shelf device and disclose the code as open source. How did you end up where you are today? I am fellowship trained in sleep medicine and the completion of my training aligned with the release of smartwatches and fitness trackers that reported sleep. I suspected early on that these devices would have promise in longitudinal sleep research. Accomplishments and Awards Why do I wake up at 3 a.m. every night? Benjamin Goldstein is Assistant Professor of Environment and Sustainability and head of the Sustainable Urban-Rural Futures (SURF) lab. The SURF Lab (www.surf-lab.ca) studies and emphasizes urban sustainability at multiple scales. Through his work at the SURF Lab, Benjamin helps understand how urban processes and urban form drive the consumption of materials and energy in cities and produce environmental change inside and outside cities. He develops methods and tools to quantify the scale of these changes and the locations where they occur using life cycle assessment, input-output analysis, geospatial data, and approaches from data science. Benjamin is particularly interested in combining quantitative methods with theory rooted in social science to explore multiple dimensions of sustainability and address issues of distributive justice. His topical foci include urban food systems (esp. urban agriculture), agri-commodities, residual resource engineering, global supply chains, sustainable production and consumption, and energy systems. I am a statistician and my research focuses on applied public health work in a variety of fields specific to injury prevention, including substance use, violence, motor vehicle crash, and traumatic brain injury. Within those applications, I apply analytic methods for longitudinal data analysis, spatial and spatio-temporal data analysis, and predictive modeling (e.g., for clinical prediction of future injury risk applied to injuries like stroke, Benzodiazepine overdose, and firearm injury). I am also MPI of the System for Opioid Overdose Surveillance–a near-real-time system for monitoring fatal and nonfatal overdoses in Michigan; the system generates automated spatial and temporal summaries of recent overdose trends. Tamas Gombosi is the Konstantin Gringauz Distinguished University Professor of Space Science and the Gerstacker Professor of Engineering at the University of Michigan. Over his four-decade-long career at Michigan he participated in a number of space missions (Cassini, Rosetta, Stereo, MMS and others). In the last two decades he has led a highly interdisciplinary team that developed the first solution adaptive (AMR) global magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulation code of space plasmas. His most recent research focus is to bring advanced machine learning to space weather modeling. He is Fellow of the AGU (1996), Member of the International Academy of Astronautics (1997), recipient of AGU’s inaugural Space Weather Prize (2013), Van Allen Lecturer of AGU’s SPA section (2017), recipient of the Kristian Birkeland Medal (2018), and recipient of AGU’s John Adam Fleming Medal (2020). My research makes use of state-of-the-art statistical learning and exploratory tools to answer questions at the interface of biology and behavioral science. My research focuses on understanding the social cognitive, affective, and biological factors that shape our closest relationships. I am particularly interested in identifying factors that help romantic couples and families maintain high quality relationships. My work draws upon a variety of methods, including experimental, observational, naturalistic (e.g., daily experience), and physiological, to capture people at multiple levels in a variety of social situations. I frequently gather dyadic longitudinal data in order to understand how relationship partners influence each other in the moment and over time. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Developing a large-scale dataset to track romantic relationship formation and maintenance Alex Gorodetsky’s research is at the intersection of applied mathematics, data science, and computational science, and is focused on enabling autonomous decision making under uncertainty. He is especially interested in controlling, designing, and analyzing autonomous systems that must act in complex environments where observational data and expensive computational simulations must work together to ensure objectives are achieved. Toward this goal, he pursues research in wide-ranging areas including uncertainty quantification, statistical inference, machine learning, control, and numerical analysis. His methodology is to increase scalability of probabilistic modeling and analysis techniques such as Bayesian inference and uncertainty quantification. His current strategies to achieving scalability revolve around leveraging computational optimal transport, developing tensor network learning algorithms, and creating new multi-fidelity information fusion approaches. Sample workflow for enabling autonomous decision making under uncertainty for a drone operating in a complex environment. We develop algorithms to compress simulation data by exploiting problem structure. We then embed the compressed representations onto onboard computational resources. Finally, we develop approaches to enable the drone to adapt, learn, and refine knowledge by interacting with, and collecting data from, the environment. Ben studies the social and political impacts of government algorithms. This work falls into several categories. First, evaluating how people make decisions in collaboration with algorithms. This work involves developing machine learning algorithms and studying how people use them in public sector prediction and decision settings. Second, studying the ethical and political implications of government algorithms. Much of this work draws on STS and legal theory to interrogate topics such as algorithmic fairness, smart cities, and criminal justice risk assessments. Third, developing algorithms for public sector applications. In addition to academic research, Ben spent a year developing data analytics tools as a data scientist for the City of Boston. My core intellectual interest is the way in which parenting behaviors, like the use of physical punishment, or parental expressions of emotional warmth, have an effect on child outcomes like aggression, antisocial behavior, anxiety and depression, and how these dynamics play out across contexts, neighborhoods, and cultures. A lot of my work is done with international samples. In my work I use statistical models, like multilevel models and some econometric models, and software like Stata, R, HLM and ArcGIS, to examine things like growth and change over time, or community, school or parent effects on children and families. I have emerging interests in text-mining and natural language processing. Visualization of multilevel modeling using High School and Beyond data set. Dr. Andrew Gronewold, P.E., is an Associate Professor with the School for Environment and Sustainability (SEAS) at the University of Michigan. He also holds adjunct faculty appointments in the University of Michigan’s Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, and the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences. Dr. Gronewold conducts research through a range of hydrological science projects that explore methods for quantifying and communicating uncertainties arising within long-term hydrological monitoring networks and data, and incorporating those uncertainties into models and risk-based water resources management decisions. Much of his recent research has focused on monitoring, analyzing, and forecasting the long-term water budget and water levels of the Laurentian Great Lakes. Accomplishments and Awards U-M center gets $5M to study climate change impacts on water As an environmental epidemiologist and in collaboration with government and community partners, I study how social, economic, health, and built environment characteristics and/or air quality affect vulnerability to extreme heat and extreme precipitation. This research will help cities understand how to adapt to heat, heat waves, higher pollen levels, and heavy rainfall in a changing climate. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Using Geospatial Data Science to Identify Vulnerable Communities to Climate Change Functional genomic data, such as RNA-seq, microarray, protein-protein interactions, are growing exponentially these days. The research in Guan Lab focuses on developing novel and high-accuracy algorithms that integrate these data for predicting gene functions and networks. We have the following ongoing projects in the lab: 1. Modeling dynamic networks: Biological networks may rewire during cell lineage differentiation, tissue development or a disease course. We are actively developing novel algorithms that capture such dynamics. The algorithm contributed by our group (The GuanLab Team) was one of the six best-performance methods (out of over 100 submissions) in the HPN-DREAM 2013 Competition. We achieved the best performance (along another team) to subchallenge 2A, as well as the best aggregate prediction to subchallenges 2A and 2B: network timecourse prediction. 2. Isoform-level analysis: We are exploring algorithms that allow us to go beyond the traditional gene-level analysis to the isoform level. Timothy C. Guetterman is a methodologist focused on research design and mixed methods research. His research interests include advancing rigorous methods of quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods research, particularly strategies for intersecting and integrating qualitative and quantitative research. Tim is the PI of NIH-funded research that uses quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods research to investigate the use of virtual human technology in health, education, and assessment. He has been applying natural language processing techniques to the analysis of mixed methods datasets. He also conducts research on teaching, learning, and developing research methods capacity as Co-PI of a William T. Grant Foundation qualitative and mixed methods research capacity building grant and in his role as evaluator and Co-I for the NIH-funded Mixed Methods Research Training Program for the Health Sciences. Tim has extensive professional experience conducting program evaluation with a focus on educational and healthcare programs. Professor Gull works in the general area of computational condensed matter physics with a focus on the study of correlated electronic systems in and out of equilibrium. He is an expert on Monte Carlo methods for quantum systems and one of the developers of the diagrammatic ‘continuous-time’ quantum Monte Carlo methods. His recent work includes the study of the Hubbard model using large cluster dynamical mean field methods, the development of vertex function methods for optical (Raman and optical conductivity) probes, and the development of bold line diagrammatic algorithms for quantum impurities out of equilibrium. Professor Gull is involved in the development of open source computer programs for strongly correlated systems. Quantum impurities are small confined quantum systems coupled to wide leads. An externally applied time-dependent magnetic field induces a change in the population of spins on the impurity, leading to time-dependent switching behavior. The system’s equations of motion are determined by a many-body quantum field theory and solved using a diagrammatic Monte Carlo approach. The computations were performed at Columbia University and the University of Michigan. I design, develop, and deploy hybrid human-AI intelligent interactive systems to provide access to visual information in the real world. By combining the advantages of humans and AI, these systems can be nearly as robust and flexible as humans, and nearly as quick and low-cost as automated AI, enabling us to solve problems that are currently impossible with either alone. Directions include: making physical interfaces accessible to people with visual and motor impairments, enabling people with disabilities to DIY assistive technologies, and making immersive media accessible. I am a senior faculty at the University of Michigan Medical School. I am a co-investigator in an NIH-funded trial studying Psoriatic Arthritis. My past academic appointments include Assistant Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School and faculty at Boston University. I was a consultant at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, a major teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School, and an internationally recognized Center for Orthopedic and Arthritis Diseases. I am the current Chief of Rheumatology Clinical Services and Training in the Ann Arbor VA Healthcare system. I received my Rheumatology training from the University of Michigan. I am a Fellow of the American College of Rheumatology and a member of the Veterans Affairs Rheumatology Consortium, GRAPPA, and the National Psoriasis Foundation. I have been a leader in developing standards of care and criteria, including disability ratings in the VA, the 2013 DXA guidelines for the International Society of Clinical Densitometry [ISCD], Performance Pay Measures, and Lyme Disease. I was a member of the team that first described Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis and Scleroderma-like skin disorders. I have been a site investigator for controlled therapeutic studies of rheumatoid arthritis, Gout, dermatomyositis, and psoriatic arthritis. Research & Clinical Networking Interests: – Rheumatic Diseases with Cutaneous (Skin) Manifestations: Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis -Vaccine related injuries (autoimmune) -Biologic and intraarticular therapies for Osteoarthritis, Vasculitis, Myositis, Lupus, and Rheumatoid Arthritis Dr. Hadjiyski research interests include computer-aided diagnosis, artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning, predictive models, image processing and analysis, medical imaging, and control systems. His current research involves design of decision support systems for detection and diagnosis of cancer in different organs and quantitative analysis of integrated multimodality radiomics, histopathology and molecular biomarkers for treatment response monitoring using AI and machine learning techniques. He also studies the effect of the decision support systems on the physicians’ clinical performance. I am an Assistant Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Michigan. My research centers on designing future energy systems under deep decarbonization, and achieving clean, reliable, and affordable energy for All. My research advances methodologies for planning and operating electric power infrastructure using optimization and AI, and leveraging principles of energy economics and energy justice. My research engages with key stakeholders including system operators, utilities, and communities, to ensure our algorithms are deployable in real systems and that our frameworks meet the needs of communities and society. I am committed to improving access of STEM education and opportunities for women and underrepresented communities, and committed to mentoring diverse leaders in engineering and STEM. I collaborate with organizations on workshops, hackathons, and various activities for AI education and research. The most significant scientific contribution I would like to make is in developing holistic ways of decision-making for decarbonized energy systems that advance our goal of: clean, reliable, and affordable energy for All. Our research doesn’t stop in the lab: tech transfer from lab to industry, science-backed policy and regulatory changes, and education through student engagement and public outreach programs are vital to our success. I’m excited at the potential to leverage data science and AI to support the energy transition, in communities and globally around the world. I want to change the way we, as individuals and society, think about energy, and bring this to the front of our day-to-day lives. And I believe : You can’t have too many plants You can’t have too many books My research focuses on computer security and privacy, with an emphasis on problems that broadly impact society and public policy. Topics that interest me include software security, network security, data privacy, anonymity, election cybersecurity, censorship resistance, computer forensics, ethics, and cybercrime. I’m also interested in the interaction of technology with politics and international affairs. Accomplishments and Awards Computer expert hacks Dominion Voting Machine in front of judge, changes votes with Bic pen My research focuses on the development of novel Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) technology for imaging the heart. We focus in particular on quantitative imaging techniques, in which the signal intensity at each pixel in an image represents a measurement of an inherent property of a tissue. Much of our research is based on cardiac Magnetic Resonance Fingerprinting (MRF), which is a class of methods for simultaneously measuring multiple tissue properties from one rapid acquisition. Our group is exploring novel ways to combine physics-based modeling of MRI scans with deep learning algorithms for several purposes. First, we are exploring the use of deep learning to design quantitative MRI scans with improved accuracy and precision. Second, we are developing deep learning approaches for image reconstruction that will allow us to reduce image noise, improve spatial resolution and volumetric coverage, and enable highly accelerated acquisitions to shorten scan times. Third, we are exploring ways of using artificial intelligence to derive physiological motion signals directly from MRI data to enable continuous scanning that is robust to cardiac and breathing motion. In general, we focus on algorithms that are either self-supervised or use training data generated in computer simulations, since the collection of large amounts of training data from human subjects is often impractical when designing novel imaging methods. He develops and applies operations research, data science, and systems approaches to public and private service industries. His research focuses on the management and policy analysis of emerging networked industries and innovative mobility services such as smart parking, connected vehicles, autonomous vehicles, ride-hailing, bike sharing, and car sharing. He has worked extensively with both public and private sector partners worldwide. He is a queueing theorist that uses statistics, stochastic modeling, simulation and dynamic optimization. I focus on clinical informatics, both locally and nationally. Accomplishments and Awards Vaccine Effectiveness Against Long COVID in Children My research focuses on the intended and unintended consequences of language in financial markets. I examine this relationship across a number of contexts, such as the Federal Reserve, initial public offerings, and mergers and acquisitions. More broadly, my work aims to develop new theoretical and methodological approaches to understand the role of language in society. Marcelline Harris, Ph.D., R.N., is Associate Professor of Systems, Populations and Leadership in the School of Nursing at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Dr. Harris’s research interests focus on what is being labeled the “continuous use” of clinical data (the use of clinical data for one or more purposes), computable knowledge representation strategies, and the use of electronic clinical data for practice and research.  Her research has been funded by NIH, AHRQ, RWJF, and PCORI.  Harris also has extensive enterprise level experience, having served in both scientific and operational positions that address the development and governance of systems that support the capture, storage, indexing, and retrieval of clinical data.  At Michigan, she retains this translational perspective, emphasizing clinical data for patient-centered research, clinical surveillance and predictive analytics. Catherine H. Hausman is an Associate Professor in the School of Public Policy and a Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research. She uses causal inference, related statistical methods, and microeconomic modeling to answer questions at the intersection of energy markets, environmental quality, climate change, and public policy. Recent projects have looked at inequality and environmental quality, the natural gas sector’s role in methane leaks, the impact of climate change on the electricity grid, and the effects of nuclear power plant closures. Her research has appeared in the American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, the American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, and the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Accomplishments and Awards In the central U.S., an electric grid bottleneck persists Research interests include quantile regression modeling for associations related to possibly unusual or extreme events, subgroup analysis, and uncertainty quantification after model selection. My laboratory data science research includes: (1) Ontology development. We have initiated and led the development of several community-based ontologies, including Vaccine Ontology (VO), Ontology of Adverse Events (OAE), Cell Line Ontology (CLO), Ontology of Genes and Genomes (OGG), and Interaction Network Ontology (INO). (2) Ontology tool development. We have developed many ontology software programs, such as OntoFox and Ontobee, which are widely used for ontology reuse, ontology development, and ontology applications. (3) Literature mining, with a focus on ontology-based literature mining approaches. (4) Bayesian network (BN) modeling for analysis of gene interaction networks. Meanwhile, we have applied these ontologies, ontology-related approaches, and BN modeling in different data science domains including vaccinology, microbiology, immunology, and pharmacovigilance. With ever increasing quantities of big data, how to integrate, share, and analyze these data has become a huge challenge. Hundreds of biological interaction pathway resources are publicly available. While each of these resources is widely used, the data in these resources are typically overlapped but not integrated. This disintegration results in redundant work and inefficient data usages. An ontology is a human- and computer-interpretable set of terms and relations that represent entities in a specific domain and how these terms relate to each other. As part of a funded MCubed Diamond project, we aim to ontologically and non-redundantly represent and integrate various molecular interactions, pathways, and networks. The integrated ontology of interaction pathways and networks will then be used by novel statistical and computational methods to efficiently address various scientific problems. Margaret Hedstrom, PhD, is the Robert M Warner Collegiate Professor of Information in the School of Information and Faculty Associate in the Institute for Social Research. Prof. Hedstrom’s research centers on the methods, costs, incentives, and implementation of scalable digital curation and archiving services as a core element of the underlying infrastructure for research data management, reproducible research, and data analysis.  She studies the social and technical dimensions digital curation including data sharing behaviors among scientists in different research domains, techniques for automated metadata extraction and user-contributed metadata, requirements for meaningful reuse of numeric, image, and textual data, and long-term preservation of digital information.  Her current research projects span projects involving researchers in environmental science and sustainability, social science, bioinformatics, and materials science. Dr. Hemphill studies conversations in social media and aims to promote just access to social media spaces and their data. She uses computational approaches to modeling political topics, predicting and addressing toxicity in online discussions, and tracing linguistic adaptations among extremists. She also studies digital data curation and is especially interested in ways to measure and model data reuse so that we can make informed decisions about how to allocate data resources. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Ensuring FAIRness in Social Media Archives “Frightening”: Experts alarmed after Texas border “invaded” by far-right “God’s Army” convoy Experts guide: U-M faculty weigh in on 2024 elections My research primarily focuses on the following main themes: 1) development of methods for risk prediction and analyzing treatment effect heterogeneity, 2) Bayesian nonparametrics and Bayesian machine learning methods with a particular emphasis on the use of these methods in the context of survival analysis, 3) statistical methods for analyzing heterogeneity in risk-benefit profiles and for supporting individualized treatment decisions, and 4) development of empirical Bayes and shrinkage methods for high-dimensional statistical applications. I am also broadly interested in collaborative work in biomedical research with a focus on the application of statistics in cancer research. Professor Heneghan’s research interests include music analysis, study of archival documents, the history of music theory, and the Second Viennese School. Her new research project examines the corpus of piping tunes collected by James Goodman in south-west Ireland during the mid-1800s. Funded by MIDAS, this work is part of a larger project with colleagues in music theory, statistics, and linguistics entitled “A Computational Study of Patterned Melodic Structures across Musical Cultures.” Alfred O. Hero, PhD, is the R. Jamison and Betty Williams Professor of Engineering at the University of Michigan and co-Director of the Michigan Institute for Data Science. The Hero group focuses on building foundational theory and methodology for data science and engineering. Data science is the methodological underpinning for data collection, data management, data analysis, and data visualization. Lying at the intersection of mathematics, statistics, computer science, information science, and engineering, data science has a wide range of application in areas including: public health and personalized medicine, brain sciences, environmental and earth sciences, astronomy, materials science, genomics and proteomics, computational social science, business analytics, computational finance, information forensics, and national defense. The Hero group is developing theory and algorithms for data collection, analysis and visualization that use statistical machine learning and distributed optimization. These are being to applied to network data analysis, personalized health, multi-modality information fusion, data-driven physical simulation, materials science, dynamic social media, and database indexing and retrieval. Several thrusts are being pursued: Development of tools to extract useful information from high dimensional datasets with many variables and few samples (large p small n). A major focus here is on the mathematics of “big data” that can establish fundamental limits; aiding data analysts to “right size” their sample for reliable extraction of information. Areas of interest include: correlation mining in high dimension, i.e., inference of correlations between the behaviors of multiple agents from limited statistical samples, and dimensionality reduction, i.e., finding low dimensional projections of the data that preserve information in the data that is relevant to the analyst. Data representation, analysis and fusion on non-linear non-euclidean structures. Examples of such data include: data that comes in the form of a probability distribution or histogram (lies on a hypersphere with the Hellinger metric); data that are defined on graphs or networks (combinatorial non-commutative structures); data on spheres with point symmetry group structure, e.g., quaternion representations of orientation or pose. Resource constrained information-driven adaptive data collection. We are interested in sequential data collection strategies that utilize feedback to successively select among a number of available data sources in such a way to minimize energy, maximize information gains, or minimize delay to decision. A principal objective has been to develop good proxies for the reward or risk associated with collecting data for a particular task (detection, estimation, classification, tracking). We are developing strategies for model-free empirical estimation of surrogate measures including Fisher information, R'{e}nyi entropy, mutual information, and Kullback-Liebler divergence. In addition we are quantifying the loss of plan-ahead sensing performance due to use of such proxies. Correlation mining pipeline transforms raw high dimensional data (bottom) to information that can be rendered in interpretable sparse graphs and networks, simple screeplots, and denoised images (top). The pipeline controls data collection, feature extraction and correlation mining by integrating domain information and its assessed value relative to the desired task (on left) and accounting for constraints on data collection budget and uncertainty bounds (on right). Before joining the faculty at the University of Michigan in 2018 as Professor and Marion Elizabeth Blue Chair of Children and Families, I was Co-Director of the 3DL Partnership at the University of Washington, where I collaborated with academic colleagues, students, and service providers throughout the state to conduct and translate research on social emotional learning (SEL) and trauma-informed practices. I am now pursuing a similar line of research in Michigan, where I am collaborating with state partners and to identify, develop, and refine new approaches to disseminate research for schools and early childhood settings engaged in SEL and trauma work. As a scholar, I am committed to increasing the visibility, application, and sustainability of evidence-based programs and practices relevant to these topics and have worked extensively in the U.S. and internationally to advance goals for prevention and the promotion of child well-being. Accomplishments and Awards Advancing a prevention-oriented support system for the health and safety of children Joseph A. Himle, PhD, is the Associate Dean for Research and the Howard V. Brabson Collegiate Professor of Social Work, School of Social Work, and Professor of Psychiatry, Medical School, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. The goal of Prof. Himle’s research is to design, develop and test a inconspicuous, awareness-enhancement and monitoring device (AEMD) which will assist the treatment of trichotillomania (TTM), a disorder involving recurrent pulling of one’s hair resulting in noticeable hair loss. TTM is associated with significant impairments in social functioning and often has a profound negative impact on self-esteem and well being. Best practice treatment for TTM involves a form of behavioral therapy known as habit reversal therapy (HRT). HRT requires persons with trichotillomania to be aware of their hair pulling behaviors, yet the majority of persons with TTM pull most of their hair outside of their awareness . HRT also requires TTM sufferers to record the frequency and duration of their hair pulling behaviors yet it is obviously impossible for a person to monitor behaviors that they are unaware of. Our Phase I efforts have produced a prototype device (AEMD) that solves these two problems. The prototype AEMD signals the TTM sufferer if their hand approaches their hair, thereby bringing pulling-related behavior into awareness. The prototype AEMD also logs the time, date, duration, and user classification of hair pulling related events and can later transfer the logged data to a personal computer for analysis and data presentation. He continues to refine this device and seek to integrate it with smart-phones to better understand activities and locations associated with hair pulling or other body-focused repetitive behaviors (e.g., skin picking). In the future, he seeks to pool data from users to get a better sense of common situations and other factors associated with elevated pulling rates. He intends to develop other electronic tools to detect, monitor and intervene with other mental disorders in the future. Professor Hines’ research focuses on the analysis of the donative behavior of Americans, and how it affects the intergenerational and interpersonal transmission of economic well-being. To what extent do parents leave property to their children and others, and how is this behavior affected by legal institutions, taxes, social norms, and other considerations? While there are no comprehensive sources of data on wills, trusts, lifetime gifts, and other forms of property transmission, there is ample available information from legal documents that with the help of natural language processing can hopefully be coded and analyzed in a systematic way. Accomplishments and Awards Nation’s Top Economists Are Short-Term Happy, Long-Term Glum A major focus of the MLiNS lab is to combine stimulated Raman histology (SRH), a rapid label-free, optical imaging method, with deep learning and computer vision techniques to discover the molecular, cellular, and microanatomic features of skull base and malignant brain tumors. We are using SRH in our operating rooms to improve the speed and accuracy of brain tumor diagnosis. Our group has focused on deep learning-based computer vision methods for automated image interpretation, intraoperative diagnosis, and tumor margin delineation. Our work culminated in a multicenter, prospective, clinical trial, which demonstrated that AI interpretation of SRH images was equivalent in diagnostic accuracy to pathologist interpretation of conventional histology. We were able to show, for the first time, that a deep neural network is able to learn recognizable and interpretable histologic image features (e.g. tumor cellularity, nuclear morphology, infiltrative growth pattern, etc) in order to make a diagnosis. Our future work is directed at going beyond human-level interpretation towards identifying molecular/genetic features, single-cell classification, and predicting patient prognosis. Accomplishments and Awards Heart and Brain Research Institute given new name, announces pilot projects Jingwen Hu, PhD, is Associate Research Scientist in the University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute (UMTRI) with a secondary appointment as Associate Research Scientist in Mechanical Engineering in the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. The primary goal of Prof. Hu’s research is to reduce the incidence of injuries and fatalities in motor-vehicle crashes and other injurious events using a multidisciplinary approach.  It involves 1) collecting and analyzing large-scale injury data to identify the injury problems and assess the performance of safety designs, 2) performing physical tests and computational simulations to investigate human impact responses, injury mechanisms, and injury tolerances for various body regions under field-relevant loading conditions, and 3) developing tools for large-scale computational simulations to explore the best solutions for reducing impact-induced injuries. I am an assistant professor in Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering (IMSE) at the University of Michigan-Dearborn. Prior to joining UM-Dearborn, I was a research assistant professor and postdoctoral research scholar at Vanderbilt University. My research areas of interest are uncertainty quantification, Bayesian data analytics, big data analytics, machine learning, optimization under uncertainty, and applications of data analytics and machine learning in aerospace, mechanical and manufacturing systems, and material science. The goal of my research is to develop novel computational methods to design sustainable and reliable engineering systems by leveraging the rich information contained in the high-fidelity computational simulation models, experimental data, and big operational data and historical data. Wei Hu is broadly interested in the theoretical and scientific foundations of modern machine learning, especially deep learning. His research aims to obtain a solid, rigorous, and practically relevant theoretical understanding of machine learning pipelines, as well as to develop principles to make them more reliable and efficient. Hu is a media scholar interested in the historical and theoretical context of digital culture and AI. His first monograph, A Prehistory of the Cloud (MIT Press, 2015), explored the material infrastructure of the cloud, while Digital Lethargy (MIT Press, 2022), explored the racialized dimensions of labor within AI through key works of art and literature. He is at work on a new project, A History of the World in 7 Datasets. He is also a core faculty member of the Helen Zell Writers’ Program, U-M’s MFA program in creative writing. I'm excited about using machine learning and AI to better understand how the human brain works—and vice versa. I love exploring how we can use deep learning to decode brain signals and uncover patterns in things like pain or language processing. At the same time, I’m fascinated by how comparing brain activity with AI models can teach us more about both systems. It’s like building a two-way bridge between neuroscience and artificial intelligence. 1. I love martial arts (Tai-chi, Kendo, Taekwondo). 2. I practice Zen meditation. Prof. Huan’s research broadly revolves around uncertainty quantification, data-driven modeling, and numerical optimization. He focuses on methods to bridge together models and data: e.g., optimal experimental design, Bayesian statistical inference, uncertainty propagation in high-dimensional settings, and algorithms that are robust to model misspecification. He seeks to develop efficient numerical methods that integrate computationally-intensive models with big data, and combine uncertainty quantification with machine learning to enable robust and reliable prediction, design, and decision-making. Optimal experimental design seeks to identify experiments that produce the most valuable data. For example, when designing a combustion experiment to learn chemical kinetic parameters, design condition A maximizes the expected information gain. When Bayesian inference is performed on data from this experiment, we indeed obtain “tighter” posteriors (with less uncertainty) compared to those obtained from suboptimal design conditions B and C. Prof. Huang is specialized in satellite remote sensing, atmospheric radiation, and climate modeling. Optimization, pattern analysis, and dimensional reduction are extensively used in his research for explaining observed spectrally resolved infrared spectra, estimating geophysical parameters from such hyperspectral observations, and deducing human influence on the climate in the presence of natural variability of the climate system. His group has also developed a deep-learning model to make a data-driven solar forecast model for use in the renewable energy sector. The UM-DBI Laboratory’s current work focuses on the development of electroencephalogram (EEG)-based brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) into practical clinical tools for use by people with physical impairments. Barriers to clinical use include signal processing challenges, selection of tasks for BCI operation, interactions between BCIs and different conditions causing impairments, and technical support issues to troubleshoot in-home BCI use. We are developing algorithms for real-time analysis of EEG to determine which key a user wants to activate or to identify whether the user currently wants to activate any key at all. We also analyze survey data to guide BCI design decisions. My research seeks to exploit graph-based modeling theory and the tools of machine learning for efficient control of physical dynamical systems and control co-design in these systems. I am particularly interested in the design of graph-based machine/deep learning model structures that are compatible with basic physics, and using those model structures for real-time actions. Application of interest include advanced manufacturing, thermal and energy storage systems. Time series analysis with applications to ecology, epidemiology, health economics, cell motion and neuroscience. Methodological work on inference for partially observed stochastic dynamic systems. The IF2 algorithm (Ionides, EL, D Nguyen, Y Atchade, S Stoev and AA King., 2015, “Inference for dynamic and latent variable models via iterated, perturbed Bayes maps,” PNAS 112:719-724). My applied research focuses on simulation models of the progression of multiple chronic complications and comorbidities of diabetes and its precursors. I study the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of early interventions in the progression of diabetes. My methodological research synthesizes secondary data from complementary studies to model complex processes. Machine learning approaches and new data science algorithms are an emerging frontier for the atmospheric sciences. We explore whether newly developed physics-guided machine learning algorithms trained with atmospheric model data or observations can serve as emulators for physical processes in weather and climate models, such as the time-consuming solar radiation code, precipitation mechanisms, or the shallow or deep convection cloud schemes. A second, less aggressive approach is to utilize machine learning approaches for the estimation of uncertain parameters in the subgrid-scale physical parameterizations of atmospheric models. We use idealized weather and climate model configurations to intercompare the pros and cons of various machine learning algorithms, such as linear regression, random forests, boosted forests, artificial neural networks and deep neural networks with and without convolutions. In addition, we are interested in machine learning approaches to understand and foster the predictability of the climate system over subseasonal-to seasonal (weeks-to-months) time scales. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Supporting Decision-making for a Vital Waterway in the Great Lakes by Machine Learning Model-based Lake Ice Forecasting I am interested in how governance, communities, and inequality emerge in sociotechnical systems, and how the structure of sociotechnical systems encodes and reinforces these processes. To those ends, I develop empirical data and computational methods, focusing on latent variable models; statistical inference in networks; empirical design to study governance in organizations, platforms, and computational social systems; and causal inference and measurement in observational data. Several sample projects: > developing empirical populations of networks to infer social and ecological processes encoded in networks > using probabilistic methods to infer the structure and dynamics of the illicit wildlife trade > building from theory from political science, statistics, and education to disentangle issues of “bias” in computational systems Accomplishments and Awards UMSI assistant professor Abigail Jacobs earns Microsoft Research AI and Society Fellowship Research summary: My area of research in the past has been data management, which has since evolved into data science. I’ve worked in many aspects of data science over the course of my career, particularly the integration of data across multiple sources and the usability of database systems by non-technical users. Currently, the bulk of my research focuses on equity issues in data science and AI and, more broadly, issues of ethics and fairness in these fields that are becoming ever more pervasive. I have over 200 major papers, an H-index of 96, and 38 patents. I am also a fellow of the ACM, “The First Society in Computing,” (since 2003), and of the AAAS (since 2018).  I’ve served on the board of the Computing Research Association (2009-2018). I’ve been an Associate Editor for the ACM Transactions on Database Systems (1992-1995), Program Chair of the ACM SIGMOD annual conference (1996), Program Chair of the ISMB conference (2005), a trustee of the VLDB (Very Large DataBase) foundation (2004-2009), Founding Editor-in-Chief of the Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment (2008-2014), and Program Chair of the VLDB Conference (2014). Since 2016, I’ve been Editor of the Morgan & Claypool Synthesis Lecture Series on Data Management. I have received the ACM SIGMOD Contributions Award in 2013 and the David E Liddle Research Excellence Award (at the University of Michigan) in 2008, among other awards. Interesting projects: I direct the NSF Institute Framework for Integrative Data Equity Systems ( FIDES ). Equity matters as we increasingly use data and AI methods in so many aspects of our lives. These powerful tools can magnify existing inequities or inadvertently introduce inequities because of system design choices. Our work in this topic is to develop methods that can systematically identify inequities in the data and potentially also address them. I developed the first MOOC on Data Science Ethics more than 5 years ago and published it on EdX . Individual case study videos are independently available for download with a creative commons license to encourage teachers everywhere to incorporate these into their classes, picking and choosing only what they want. This MOOC has been so successful that it is now also carried on Coursera and FutureLearn . My current position and the journey to it: As MIDAS Director, I am responsible for the overall direction and mission of MIDAS . It’s my role to make sure that MIDAS is working productively and strategically towards its stated mission as well as delivering value to the University of Michigan and our research community. I am also the Bernard A Galler Collegiate Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, which I joined in 1999.  Prior to that, I served as Head of the Database Research Department at AT&T Labs in Florham Park, NJ. Why I’m passionate about my work: Data science has so much potential to do good things in so many aspects of life and society. I’m passionate about helping with that transformation and helping Michigan lead in that transformation while at the same time being cognizant of the potential risk and pitfalls. I want to help us get as much of the benefit of data science and AI as we can without suffering the harm they could bring if mismanaged. Fun fact: MIDAS’ offices are located on the 6th floor of Weiser Hall.  I make it a point never to use the elevator: I always take the stairs. Accomplishments and Awards H.V. Jagadish Receives Stephen S. Attwood Award ​I am an Assistant Professor in the School for Environment and Sustainability at the University of Michigan and am part of the Sustainable Food Systems Initiative. My research examines the impacts of environmental change on agricultural production, and how farmers may adapt to reduce negative impacts. I also examine ways that we can sustainably enhance agricultural production. To do this work, I combine remote sensing and geospatial analyses with household-level and census datasets to examine farmer decision-making and agricultural production across large spatial and temporal scales. Conducting wheat crop cuts to measure yield in India, which we use to train algorithms that map yield using satellite data Accomplishments and Awards Solar-Powered Farming Is Quickly Depleting the World’s Groundwater Supply My research focus the application and development of new algorithms for solving complex business analytics problems. Applications vary from revenue management, dynamic pricing, marketing analytics, to retail logistics. In terms of methodology, I use a combination of operations research and machine learning/online optimization techniques. Ruiwei works on discrete optimization under uncertainty. Many practical engineering problems search for good discrete decisions under uncertain or even incomplete inputs. Ruiwei’s research aims to develop data-enabled stochastic optimization (DESO) models and solution methodology that bring together data analytics, integer programming, stochastic programming, and robust optimization. Together with his collaborators, Ruiwei applies DESO approaches to various engineering problems, including power and water system operations, transportation systems, and healthcare resource scheduling. The recognitions of Ruiwei’s work include a NSF CAREER award, two INFORMS Junior Faculty Interest Group paper awards, and an Outstanding Teaching award from the IISE Operations Research Division. Accomplishments and Awards Shifting power operations to reduce wildfires My research focuses on statistical genomics and computational statistics. I am interested in developing statistical and computational methods for the analysis of large-scale biological datasets generated by modern high-throughput technologies such as next-generation sequencing. I implemented many of the methods that I developed as software tools and packages to be used by the research community. I am also interested in developing efficient algorithms and methods that deal with computational problems arising from statistics genomics. I have worked on and am working on problems including efficient algorithms for resampling-based hypothesis testing, penalized modeling and optimization algorithms for model fitting, as well as computational methods for density estimation and machine learning. Judy Jin, PhD, is Professor of Industrial and Operations Engineering in the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Jin’s research focuses on the development of new data fusion methodologies for improving system operation and quality with the emphasis on fusion of data and engineering knowledge collected from disparate sources by integrating multidisciplinary methods. Her research has been widely applied in both manufacturing and service industry by providing techniques for knowledge discovery and risk-informed decision making. Key research issues are being pursued: Advanced quality control methodologies for system monitoring, diagnosis and control with temporally and spatially dense operational/sensing data. Multi-scale data transform and high order tensor data analysis for modeling, analysis, classification, and making inferences of multistream sensing signals. Optimal sensor distribution and hierarchical variable selection methods for system abnormal detection and sensor fusion decisions, which integrates the causal probability network model, statistical change detection, set-covering algorithm, and hierarchical lasso regression. A unified approach for variation reduction in multistage manufacturing processes (MMPs) using a state space model, which blend the control theory with advanced statistics for MMPs sensing, monitoring, diagnosis and control, integrative design of process tolerance and maintenance policy considering the interaction between product quality and tool reliability. Data science applications : (a) Smart manufacturing with sensor fusion, process monitoring, diagnosis and control (e.g., metal forming including stamping, forging, casting and rolling), assembly, ultrasonic welding, photovoltaic thin film deposition. (b) Travel time estimation and traffic prediction for intelligent transportation systems. (c) Multi-stream data analysis of human motion/vehicle crash testing data for improving vehicle design and safety. (d) Risk informed decision support for healthcare and clinical decisions. (e) Customer behavior modeling for fraud detection in healthcare and telecommunication. (f) Human decision-making behavior modeling in a dynamic/emergency environment. Timothy D. Johnson, Ph.D., is Professor of Biostatistics in the School of Public Health at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Johnson’s research interests include bayesian methods and MCMC, statistical image analysis, spatial point processes, statistical modeling of biomedical data, and applications in neuroscience, cancer, radiology, radiation oncolocy, Psychology/Psychiatry and endocrinology. Sean Johnson is an observational astronomer and primarily studies galaxies, supermassive black holes, and the surrounding gas supplies that fuel their growth. By combining datasets from space-based and large ground-based telescopes, he studies the physical conditions of the gas supplies that enable galaxies to continue forming stars, and identifies the chemical signatures of heavy elements that are produced in supernova explosions and deposited into intergalactic space by galactic-scale winds and galaxy interactions. He is co-PI of the Cosmic Ultraviolet Baryon Survey (CUBS) and leading wide-field ground-based follow-up for the MUSE Quasar Blind Emitter Survey (MUSEQuBES) which are increasing samples for CGM studies at z<1 by more than an order-of-magnitude by combining high quality HST UV spectra, deep integral field observations with MUSE, and wider field galaxy surveys with Magellan. Before joining U. Michigan, Sean was a Hubble and Carnegie-Princeton Postdoctoral Fellow at Princeton University where he volunteered regularly with the Prison Teaching Initiative. Prior to that, he was a graduate student at The University of Chicago. Vicki Johnson-Lawrence, PhD, is Assistant Professor in the department of Public Health and Health Sciences at the University of Michigan, Flint. Dr. Johnson-Lawrence is a social epidemiologist interested in the application of epidemiologic methods that capture the dynamic nature of psychosocial factors over the life course, and how these factors contribute to chronic disease risk.  Further, she is interested in racial/ethnic patterns of comorbid mental and physical health outcomes, and how these patterns vary throughout the life course. Dani Jones’ research program drives CIGLR’s portfolio of research in data science, machine learning, and artificial intelligence, as applied to physical limnology, weather forecasting, water cycle predictions, ecology, and observing system design. This research program aims is to advance societal adaptations to the effects of climate change, including flooding of coasts, rivers, and cities. Dani’s background is in physical oceanography, with specific expertise in adjoint modeling for comprehensive sensitivity analysis and unsupervised classification for data analysis, mostly applied to the North Atlantic and Southern Ocean. In Dani’s current role, they are establishing CIGLR’s new Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, leveraging the institute’s extensive observing assets, datasets, modeling capacity, interdisciplinary expertise, and numerous regional and international partnerships. My work employs a range of methods, with particular contributions in the field of text analysis. By building large open-source datasets and methods to analyze large volumes of political texts, I aim to expand the aspects of policymaking that are open to systematic study. Primarily, I develop methods for integrating human coding of texts with computational text analysis to increase the inferential power of hand coding. Computational text analysis tools can strategically select texts for human coders, including texts that represent larger samples and outlier texts of high inferential value. Preprocessing documents can speed hand-coding by extracting key features like named entities. I show that hand-coding and text analysis tools are each more powerful when combined in an interactive workflow. For example, we can extend inferences about who is able to influence public policy by analyzing large numbers of public comments on proposed government policies. Using this iterative mix of hand-coding and computational text analysis methods, a hand-coded sample of 10,894 hand-coded public comments on proposed policies yields equally valid inferences for over 40 million comments regarding the extent to which policy changed in the direction they sought. I thus measure lobbying success—the extent to which each group got their desired changes between the draft and final policy—for millions of people and thousands of organizations. This large sample enables new analyses of the relationships between lobbying coalitions, social movements, and policy change. I research how humans behave by observing the things we say, what we do, and who we are. My research combines linguistic analysis and network science together to understand behavior in its natural social context. I collaborate with colleagues from areas such as Psychology, Linguistics, Digital Humanities, and Sociology to improve our theories using data-driven insights and methodologies. Image caption: Indians use online matrimonial websites to complement the traditional arranged marriage process. Data from these websites can reveal widespread attitudes on caste identity through individuals signaling their openness to marrying someone from a different caste, i.e., intercaste marriage. This figure shows a comparison of demographic factors affecting openness to intercaste marriage in family-posted (left) versus self-posted (right) matrimonial profiles on a major Indian website. Values for each factor reflect a logistic regression coefficients for predicting whether that individual will be open to intercaste marriage. The difference that social status as a function of education, income, affluence, and to some degree caste, drive attitudes, where lower social status individuals are less open to intercaste marriage. Significance levels for model coefficients are reported as ‘***’ for p<0.001 , ‘**’ p<0.01 , and ‘*’ p<0.05, and bars show standard errors. This figure is taken from a paper by Ashwin Rajadesingan, Ramaswami Mahalingam, David Jurgens, “Smart, Responsible, and Upper Caste Only:Measuring Caste Attitudes through Large-Scale Analysis of Matrimonial Profiles” in the Proceedings of the AAAI International Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM), 2019. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Measuring Racial Disparity in the Language of Physician-Patient Interactions Niko Kaciroti is a Research Scientist at the Departments of Pediatrics and Biostatistics. He received his PhD in Biostatistics from the University of Michigan. Since then he has collaborated in multidisciplinary research at the University of Michigan and with researchers from other universities in the United States and internationally. Dr. Kaciroti is a faculty member at the Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics. His main research interest is in using Bayesian models for analyzing longitudinal data from clinical trials with missing values, as well as using Bayesian methods for nonlinear and dynamic models. Dr. Kaciroti is an elected member of the International Statistical Institute and serves as statistical editor for the American Journal of Preventive Medicine and the International Journal of Behavior Nutrition and Physical Activity. The Kaczorowski laboratory, led by Dr. Catherine Kaczorowski, pioneers techniques to identify and validate genetic and cellular mechanisms that promote resilience to cognitive aging, Alzheimer’s disease, and other age-related dementias. By combining mouse and human systems; genomic, anatomic, and behavioral approaches; and integrative analyses across multiple scales, data types, environmental factors, and species, we are accelerating the discovery of the precise genetic mechanisms of cognitive resilience that could yield the next generation of targets and therapeutic strategies for promoting brain health. We are now uniquely poised to propel the field of personalized medicine forward using our genetically diverse, yet reproducible models of human neurodegenerative dementias, having already contributed conceptual and technical advances that revolutionized our ability to study complex diseases, specifically human AD dementia. Dr. Kalbfleisch is a Professor of Biostatistics and Statistics at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. He served as chair of the Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, from 2002 to 2007 and as Director of the Kidney Epidemiology and Cost Center from 2008 to 2011. He received his Ph.D. in statistics in 1969 from the University of Waterloo. He was an assistant professor of statistics at the State University of New York at Buffalo (1970-73) and on faculty at the University of Waterloo (1973-2002). At Waterloo, he served as chair of the Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science (1984-1990) and as dean of the faculty of Mathematics (1990-1998). He has held visiting appointments as Professor at the University of Washington, the University of California at San Francisco, the University of Auckland, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center and the National University of Singapore. He has interests in and has publised in various areas of statistics and biostatistics including life history and survival analysis, likelihood methods of inference, bootstrapping and estimating equations, mixture and mixed effects models and medical applications, particularly in the area of renal disease and organ transplantation. Dr. Kalbfleisch is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. He is also an elected member of the International Statistical Institute, a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and a Gold Medalist of the Statistical Society of Canada. He also received the Distinguished Research Award from the UM School of Public Health in 2011. A primary research interest is in the development of models and methods for analyzing failure time or event history data. Applications of this work arise in many areas including epidemiology, medicine, demography and engineering. In event history data, interest centers on the timing and occurrence of various kinds of events such as, for example, repeated infections or recurrences of disease, or other sequences of events that may occur during a study period. I have been particularly interested in situations in which only partial data or data subject to sampling bias are available. In recent years, I have been working on statistical aspects of problems associated with End Stage Renal Disease and solid organ transplantation. The Kidney Epidemiology and Cost Center has many projects associated with these including various projects funded through the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. This  provides a rich area of application where statistical methods and developments play a substantial role in defining public policy. I am particularly interested in the development of appropriate methods for the use of such data in profiling and/or ranking medical providers. I have recently worked on the optimization and simulation of kidney paired donation programs. In these, candidates in need of a kidney transplant who have a willing but incompatible living donor are entered into a pool and we seek exchanges of donors to overcome incompatibilities. Added to this is the potential for non-directed donors who can give a kidney to one member of the pool and hence create a chain of transplants. Our methods use integer programming methods to create flexible allocation schemes that have the potential to provide substantial increases in the number of transplants achieved. My group conducts research in automation and robotics to improve work processes in the construction, operation, and maintenance of civil infrastructure and the built environment. Our research has developed several licensable technologies that include visualization, perception, and modeling techniques to help on-site construction robots with autonomous decision making. We are particularly interested in exploring new methods for enabling collaborative work strategies for human-robot teams jointly performing field construction work. In addition, we are also interested in exploring methods to integrate data to support semi-autonomous mobility for people with physical disabilities in the urban built environment. Hyun Min Kang is an Associate Professor in the Department of Biostatistics. He received his Ph.D. in Computer Science from University of California, San Diego in 2009 and joined the University of Michigan faculty in the same year. Prior to his doctoral studies, he worked as a research fellow at the Genome Research Center for Diabetes and Endocrine Disease in the Seoul National University Hospital for a year and a half, after completing his Bachelors and Masters degree in Electrical Engineering at Seoul National University. His research interest lies in big data genome science. Methodologically, his primary focus is on developing statistical methods and computational tools for large-scale genetic studies. Scientifically, his research aims to understand the etiology of complex disease traits, including type 2 diabetes, bipolar disorder, cardiovascular diseases, and glomerular diseases. Dr. Kang’s research focuses on the developments of statistical methods motivated by biomedical applications with a focus on neuroimaging. His recent key contributions can be summarized in the following three aspects: Bayesian regression for complex biomedical applications Dr. Kang and his group developed a series of Bayesian regression methods for the association analysis between the clinical outcome of interests (disease diagnostics, survival time, psychiatry scores) and the potential biomarkers in biomedical applications such as neuroimaging and genomics. In particular, they developed a new class of threshold priors as compelling alternatives to classic continuous shrinkages priors in Bayesian literatures and widely used penalization methods in frequentist literatures. Dr. Kang’s methods can substantially increase the power to detect weak but highly dependent signals by incorporating useful structural information of predictors such as spatial proximity within brain anatomical regions in neuroimaging [Zhao et al 2018; Kang et al 2018, Xue et al 2019] and gene networks in genomics [Cai et al 2017; Cai et al 2019]. Dr Kang’s methods can simultaneously select variables and evaluate the uncertainty of variable selection, as well as make inference on the effect size of the selected variables. His works provide a set of new tools for biomedical researchers to identify important biomarkers using different types of biological knowledge with statistical guarantees. In addition, Dr. Kang’s work is among the first to establish rigorous theoretical justifications for Bayesian spatial variable selection in imaging data analysis [Kang et al 2018] and Bayesian network marker selection in genomics [Cai et al 2019]. Dr. Kang’s theoretical contributions not only offer a deep understanding of the soft-thresholding operator on smooth functions, but also provide insights on which types of the biological knowledge may be useful to improve biomarker detection accuracy. Prior knowledge guided variable screening for ultrahigh-dimensional data Dr. Kang and his colleagues developed a series of variable screening methods for ultrahigh-dimensional data analysis by incorporating the useful prior knowledge in biomedical applications including imaging [Kang et al 2017, He et al 2019], survival analysis [Hong et al 2018] and genomics [He et al 2019]. As a preprocessing step for variable selection, variable screening is a fast-computational approach to dimension reduction. Traditional variable screening methods overlook useful prior knowledge and thus the practical performance is unsatisfying in many biomedical applications. To fill this gap, Dr. Kang developed a partition-based ultrahigh-dimensional variable screening method under generalized linear model, which can naturally incorporate the grouping and structural information in biomedical applications. When prior knowledge is unavailable or unreliable, Dr. Kang proposed a data-driven partition screening framework on covariate grouping and investigate its theoretical properties. The two special cases proposed by Dr. Kang: correlation-guided partitioning and spatial location guided partitioning are practically extremely useful for neuroimaging data analysis and genome-wide association analysis. When multiple types of grouping information are available, Dr. Kang proposed a novel theoretically justified strategy for combining screening statistics from various partitioning methods. It provides a very flexible framework for incorporating different types of prior knowledge. Brain network modeling and inferences Dr. Kang and his colleagues developed several new statistical methods for brain network modeling and inferences using resting-state fMRI data [Kang et al 2016, Xie and Kang 2017, Chen et al 2018]. Due to the high dimensionality of fMRI data (over 100,000 voxels in a standard brain template) with small sample sizes (hundreds of participants in a typical study), it is extremely challenging to model the brain functional connectivity network at voxel-levels. Some existing methods model brain anatomical region-level networks using the region-level summary statistics computed from voxel-level data. Those methods may suffer low power to detect the signals and have an inflated false positive rate, since the summary statistics may not well capture the heterogeneity within the predefined brain regions. To address those limitations, Dr. Kang proposed a novel method based on multi-attribute canonical correlation graphs [Kang et al 2016] to construct region-level brain network using voxel-level data. His method can capture different types of nonlinear dependence between any two brain regions consisting of hundreds or thousands of voxels. He also developed permutation tests for assessing the significance of the estimated network. His methods can largely increase power to detect signals for small sample size problems. In addition, Dr. Kang and his colleague also developed theoretically justified high-dimensional tests [Xie and Kang 2017] for constructing region-level brain networks using the voxel-level data under the multivariate normal assumption. Their theoretical results provide a useful guidance for the future development of statistical methods and theory for brain network analysis. This image illustrates the neuroimaging meta-analysis data (Kang etal 2014). Neuroimaging meta-analysis is an important tool for finding consistent effects over studies. We develop a Bayesian nonparametric model and perform a meta-analysis of five emotions from 219 studies. In addition, our model can make reverse inference by using the model to predict the emotion type from a newly presented study. Our method outperforms other methods with an average of 80% accuracy. 1. Cai Q, Kang J, Yu T (2020) Bayesian variable selection over large scale networks via the thresholded graph Laplacian Gaussian prior with application to genomics. Bayesian Analysis, In Press (Earlier version won a student paper award from Biometrics Section of the ASA in JSM 2017) 2. He K, Kang J, Hong G, Zhu J, Li Y, Lin H, Xu H, Li Y (2019) Covariance-insured screening. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis: 132, 100—114. 3. He K, Xu H, Kang J† (2019) A selective overview of feature screening methods with applications to neuroimaging data, WRIES Computational Statistics, 11(2) e1454 4. Chen S, Xing Y, Kang J, Kochunov P, Hong LE (2018). Bayesian modeling of dependence in brain connectivity, Biostatistics, In Press. 5. Kang J, Reich BJ, Staicu AM (2018) Scalar-on-image regression via the soft thresholded Gaussian process. Biometrika: 105(1) 165–184. 6. Xue W, Bowman D and Kang J (2018) A Bayesian spatial model to predict disease status using imaging data from various modalities. Frontiers in Neuroscience. 12:184. doi:10.3389/fnins.2018.00184 7. Jin Z*, Kang J†, Yu T (2018) Missing value imputation for LC-MS metabolomics data by incorporating metabolic network and adduct ion relations. Bioinformatics, 34(9):1555—1561. 8. He K, Kang J† (2018) Comments on “Computationally efficient multivariate spatio-temporal models for high-dimensional count-valued data “. Bayesian Analysis, 13(1) 289-291. 9. Hong GH, Kang J†, Li Y (2018) Conditional screening for ultra-high dimensional covariates with survival outcomes. Lifetime Data Analysis: 24(1) 45-71. 10. Zhao Y*, Kang J†, Long Q (2018) Bayesian multiresolution variable selection for ultra-high dimensional neuroimaging data. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, 15(2):537-550. (Earlier version won student paper award from ASA section on statistical learning and data mining in JSM 2014; It was also ranked as one of the top two papers in the student paper award competition in ASA section on statistics in imaging in JSM 2014) 11. Kang J, Hong GH, Li Y (2017) Partition-based ultrahigh dimensional variable screening, Biometrika, 104(4): 785-800. 12. Xie J#, Kang J# (2017) High dimensional tests for functional networks of brain anatomic regions. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 156:70-88. 13. Cai Q*, Alvarez JA, Kang J†, Yu T (2017) Network marker selection for untargeted LC/MS metabolomics data, Journal of Proteome Research, 16(3):1261-1269 14. Kang J, Bowman FD, Mayberg H, Liu H (2016) A depression network of functionally connected regions discovered via multi-attribute canonical correlation graphs. NeuroImage, 41:431-441. Our research is focused on Post ICU pain syndromes (PIPS). PIPS exhibit distinct phenotypic presentations and can be predicted by intra-ICU parameters. Our primary goal is to be able to predict post-ICU opioid use based on intra-ICU parameters. We utilize a data-driven characterization of post-ICU pain syndromes will utilize unsupervised clustering algorithms including DBSCAN and spectral clustering. Prediction of post-discharge pain severity, likelihood of specific pain presentations, and post-discharge opioid use will be achieved using logistic LASSO, random forests, and neural networks. Specifically, these tests will utilize available ICU data to predict changes between pre- and post-ICU pain severity, incidence of specific pain presentations, and incidence of opioid use. This is a representation of enhancement of human cognition and clinical intelligence with artificial intelligence. Dr. Katz’s research addresses cancer treatment communication, decision-making, and quality of care. His work aims to examine the dynamics of how precision medicine presents itself in the exam room via provider and patient communication and shared decision-making. Dr. Katz leads the Cancer Surveillance and Outcomes Research Team (CanSORT), an interdisciplinary research program centered at the University of Michigan and focused on population and intervention studies of the quality of care and outcomes of cancer detection and treatment in diverse populations.  Dr. Katz and CanSORT have been collaborating with Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) cancer registries since 2002 to study breast cancer treatment decision making at the population level. We obtain patient clinical and demographic information from SEER and combine this with surveys of patients and physicians to create comprehensive data sets that enable us to study testing and treatment trends and the challenges of individualizing treatments for breast cancer patients. In 2015 we added a new dimension to our research by partnering with evaluative testing firms to obtain tumor genomic and germline genetic test results for over 30,000 breast and ovarian cancer patients in the states of California and Georgia. We are also pursuing insurance claims data to assist with our analysis of physician network effects. Steven Katz, MD discusses BRCA and multigene sequence testing at the labs of Ambry Genetics. The primary tools currently in use are variations of linear models (regression, MLM, SEM, and so on) as we pursue the initial aims of the NICHD funded work. We are expanding into new areas that require new tools. Our adolescent sample is diverse, selected through quota sampling of high schools close enough to UM to afford the use of neuroimaging tools, but it is not population representative. To overcome this, we have begun work to calibrate our sample with the nationally representative Monitoring the Future study, implementing pseudo-weighting and multilevel regression and post-stratification. To enable much more powerful analyses, we are aiming toward the harmonization of multiple, high quality longitudinal databases from adolescence through early adulthood. This would benefit traditional analyses by allowing cross-validation with high power, but also provide opportunities for newer data science tools such as computational modeling and machine learning approaches. Our laboratory focuses on (1) the biology of cancer metastasis, especially bone metastasis, including the role of the host microenvironment; and (2) mechanisms of chemoresistance. We explore for genes that regulate metastasis and the interaction between the host microenvironment and cancer cells. We are performing single cell multiomics and spatial analysis to enable us to identify rare cell populations and promote precision medicine. Our research methodology uses a combination of molecular, cellular, and animal studies. The majority of our work is highly translational to provide clinical relevance to our work. In terms of data science, we collaborate on applications of both established and novel methodologies to analyze high dimensional; deconvolution of high dimensional data into a cellular and tissue context; spatial mapping of multiomic data; and heterogenous data integration. Accomplishments and Awards U-M Biological Station activates snowpack sensor to study changing winters James Kibbie, DMA, is Professor and Chair of the Department of Organ in the School of Music, Theatre & Dance and University Organist at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Professor Kibbie’s current research will develop and analyze a library of digitized performances of Bach’s Trio Sonatas, applying novel algorithms to study the music structure from a data science perspective. The team’s analysis will compare different performances to determine features that make performances artistic, as well as the common mistakes performers make. Findings will be integrated into courses both on organ performance and on data science. The project Investigators are Daniel Forger, professor of mathematics and computational medicine and bioinformatics and Professor Kibbie. Dr.Kiedrowski’s research focuses on the development of methods related to understanding the interactions and transport of particle radiation (neutrons, photons, and charged particles) within matter. To solve these problems, he employs both traditional numerical linear algebra methods and Monte Carlo simulations and apply data-driven approaches for the purpose of acceleration and uncertainty quantification. Specific projects include using Bayesian optimization methods to predictive and uncertainty quantified optical models for nuclear fission, applying techniques from computer vision with low-fidelity simulations to categorize transport problems for variance reduction technique selection for high-fidelity Monte Carlo calculations, using tensor network decomposition methods to accelerate transport simulations in multiscale or hierarchical problems, and using multi-fidelity transport methods (diffusion, SPN, and transport). John Kieffer, PhD, is Professor of Materials Science and Engineering in the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Kieffer’s research interests include the development of novel materials is an enabling factor for the advancement of technology. To accelerate the conception, fabrication, and deployment of materials with specific functionalities, we pursue a simulation-based predictive design approach, i.e., we devise the methodology, computational framework, and workflow, and apply these tools to develop new materials for energy applications. Our research repertoire includes first-principles quantum mechanical calculations for the prediction of the electronic structure and charge carrier mobility in organic molecules, reactive molecular dynamics simulations to study the self-assembly behavior of these molecules, and hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics techniques to investigate structural developments and processes that occur on long time scales. To validate simulation-based predictions we also carry out experimental measurements of structural dynamics and molecular transport phenomena using dielectric impedance spectroscopy and inelastic light scattering. For the latter we established a unique resource for concurrent Raman and Brillouin light scattering measurements, allowing us to simultaneously monitor the chemistry and visco-elastic properties of reacting systems at the nano-scale and in situ, without mechanical contact. Finally, we fabricate nano-porous hybrid organic-inorganic materials, including aerogels, using sol-gel synthesis techniques. Current projects include: Design of organic molecular systems with specific electronic properties, long-range order, and high charge carrier mobility for photovoltaic, sensor, and light emission application Development of solid state electrolytes for lithium battery applications Fabrication of light-weight high-strength composite materials Investigation of interfacial structures and phenomena pertaining to electronic and thermal transport processes, rheology, mechanical strength, toughness, and adhesion. Jinseok Kim, Ph.D., is Research Assistant Professor in the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.  Prof. Kim works on resolving named entity ambiguity in large-scale scholarly data (publication, patent, and funding records) in digital libraries. Especially, his current research is focused on developing methods for disambiguating author and affiliation names at a digital library scale using various supervised machine learning approaches trained on automatically labeled data . Disambiguated data from multiple sources will be integrated to be analyzed for insights into research production, scientific collaboration, funding evaluation, and research policy at a national level. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: AI-based author entity disambiguation for promoting fair evaluation of women in science Hun-Seok Kim is an associate professor at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. His research focuses on system analysis, novel algorithms, and efficient VLSI architectures for low-power/high-performance wireless communication, signal processing, computer vision, and machine learning systems. Communication mechanisms exist inside our cells to regulate gene expression and function. In cells, communication between a gene and sequences that regulate the gene occurs through physical contact. These physical contacts between regulatory element enhancers and the gene promoters may activate gene expression. Our goal is to understand how this communication occurs within the nucleus. In particular, we leverage 3D genome mapping technologies to capture the dynamic chromatin interactions and study gene regulation in the context of developmental biology. Algorithms on graphs allow us to interpret these data generated from high-throughput sequencing assays. How did you end up where you are today? I studied electrical engineering, hoping to advance the field of information and coding theory. Instead, I aim to understand the communication mechanisms governing gene transcription. What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? Interpreting biological data is often a creative process. I enjoy browsing through the data, connecting pieces, and finding patterns. The long temporal and large spatial scales of ecological systems make controlled experimentation difficult and the amassing of informative data challenging and expensive. The resulting sparsity and noise are major impediments to scientific progress in ecology, which therefore depends on efficient use of data. In this context, it has in recent years been recognized that the onetime playthings of theoretical ecologists, mathematical models of ecological processes, are no longer exclusively the stuff of thought experiments, but have great utility in the context of causal inference. Specifically, because they embody scientific questions about ecological processes in sharpest form—making precise, quantitative, testable predictions—the rigorous confrontation of process-based models with data accelerates the development of ecological understanding. This is the central premise of my research program and the common thread of the work that goes on in my laboratory. Dr. Kochunas’s research focus is on the next generation of numerical methods and parallel algorithms for high fidelity computational reactor physics and how to leverage these capabilities to develop digital twins. His group’s areas of expertise include neutron transport, nuclide transmutation, multi-physics, parallel programming, and HPC architectures. The Nuclear Reactor Analysis and Methods (NURAM) group is also developing techniques that integrate data-driven methods with conventional approaches in numerical analysis to produce “hybrid models” for accurate, real-time modeling applications. This is embodied by his recent efforts to combine high-fidelity simulation results simulation models in virtual reality through the Virtual Ford Nuclear Reactor. Relationship of concepts for the Digital Model, Digital Shadow, Digital Twin, and the Physical Asset using images and models of the Ford Nuclear Reactor as an example. Large arrows represent automated information exchange and small arrows represent manual data exchange. I have been involved in the building of data infrastructure in the study of elections, political systems, violence, geospatial units, demographics, and topography. This infrastructure will eventually lead to the integration of data across many domains in the social, health, population, and behavioral sciences. My core research interests are in elections and political organizations. Accomplishments and Awards Great Stakes: Michigan GOP disarray sparks court intervention and dueling conventions Governor’s revolt: Why Iowa’s Kim Reynolds split from Trump ahead of caucus Every year, states negotiate, conclude, sign, and give effect to hundreds of new international agreements. Koremenos argues that the detailed design provisions of such agreements matter for phenomena that scholars, policymakers, and the public care about: When and how international cooperation occurs and is maintained. Theoretically, Koremenos develops hypotheses regarding how cooperation problems like incentives to cheat can be confronted and moderated through law’s detailed design provisions. Empirically, she exploits her data set composed of a random sample of international agreements in economics, environment, human rights and security. Her theory and testing lead to a consequential discovery: Considering the vagaries of international politics, international cooperation looks more law-like than anarchical, with the detailed provisions of international law chosen in ways that increase the prospects and robustness of cooperation. Nicholas A. Kotov is Irving Langmuir Distinguished University Professor in Chemical Sciences at the University of Michigan. He is a pioneer of theoretical foundations and practical implementations of complex systems from ‘imperfect’ nanoparticles that offer a vast field for the application of data science and machine learning. Chiral nanostructures, biomimetic nanocomposites, and graph theoretical representations are the focal points in his current work.  Nicholas is a recipient of more than 60 awards and recognitions. Together with his students, Nicholas founded several startups that commercialized self-assembled nanostructures for the energy, healthcare, and automotive industry. Nicholas is a Fellow of the America Academy of Arts and Sciences and the National Academy of Inventors.  He is an advocate for scientists with disabilities . Accomplishments and Awards U-M to lead $30 million complex-particle center Breaking the Limits of Chiral Structures: First Time Control of Twist in Nanoparticles 2024 AAAS Fellows include three Michigan Engineering professors Antonios M. Koumpias, Ph.D., is Assistant Professor of Economics in the department of Social Sciences at the University of Michigan, Dearborn. Prof. Koumpias is an applied microeconomist with research interests in public economics, with an emphasis on behavioral tax compliance, and health economics. In his research, he employs quasi-experimental methods to disentangle the causal impact of policy interventions that occur at the aggregate (e.g. states) or the individual (e.g. taxpayers) level in a comparative case study setting. Namely, he relies on regression discontinuity designs, regression kink designs, matching methods, and synthetic control methods to perform program evaluation that estimates the causal treatment effect of the policy in question. Examples include the use of a regression discontinuity design to estimate the impact of a tax compliance reminders on payments of overdue income tax liabilities in Greece, matching methods to measure the influence of mass media campaigns in Pakistan on income tax filing and the synthetic control method to evaluate the long-term effect of state Medicaid expansions on mortality. Evolution of Annual Changes in All-cause Childless Adult Mortality in New York State following 2001 State Medicaid Expansion The GEMS (Graph Exploration and Mining at Scale) Lab develops new, fast and principled methods for mining and making sense of large-scale data. Within data mining, we focus particularly on interconnected or graph data, which are ubiquitous. Some examples include social networks, brain graphs or connectomes, traffic networks, computer networks, phonecall and email communication networks, and more. We leverage ideas from a diverse set of fields, including matrix algebra, graph theory, information theory, machine learning, optimization, statistics, databases, and social science. At a high level, we enable single-source and multi-source data analysis by providing scalable methods for fusing data sources, relating and comparing them, and summarizing patterns in them. Our work has applications to exploration of scientific data (e.g., connectomics or brain graph analysis), anomaly detection, re-identification, and more. Some of our current research directions include: *Scalable Network Discovery from non-Network Data*: Although graphs are ubiquitous, they are not always directly observed. Discovering and analyzing networks from non-network data is a task with applications in fields as diverse as neuroscience, genomics, energy, economics, and more. However, traditional network discovery approaches are computationally expensive. We are currently investigating network discovery methods (especially from time series) that are both fast and accurate. *Graph similarity and Alignment with Representation Learning*: Graph similarity and alignment (or fusion) are core tasks for various data mining tasks, such as anomaly detection, classification, clustering, transfer learning, sense-making, de-identification, and more. We are exploring representation learning methods that can generalize across networks and can be used in such multi-source network settings. *Scalable Graph Summarization and Interactive Analytics*: Recent advances in computing resources have made processing enormous amounts of data possible, but the human ability to quickly identify patterns in such data has not scaled accordingly. Thus, computational methods for condensing and simplifying data are becoming an important part of the data-driven decision making process. We are investigating ways of summarizing data in a domain-specific way, as well as leveraging such methods to support interactive visual analytics. *Distributed Graph Methods*: Many mining tasks for large-scale graphs involve solving iterative equations efficiently. For example, classifying entities in a network setting with limited supervision, finding similar nodes, and evaluating the importance of a node in a graph, can all be expressed as linear systems that are solved iteratively. The need for faster methods due to the increase in the data that is generated has permeated all these applications, and many more. Our focus is on speeding up such methods for large-scale graphs both in sequential and distributed environments. *User Modeling*: The large amounts of online user information (e.g., in social networks, online market places, streaming music and video services) have made possible the analysis of user behavior over time at a very large scale. Analyzing the user behavior can lead to better understanding of the user needs, better recommendations by service providers that lead to customer retention and user satisfaction, as well as detection of outlying behaviors and events (e.g., malicious actions or significant life events). Our current focus is on understanding career changes and predicting job transitions. Professor Kowalski’s recent research analyzes experiments and clinical trials with the goal of designing policies to target insurance expansions and medical treatments to individuals who stand to benefit from them the most. Her research has also explored the impact of previous Medicaid expansions, the Affordable Care Act, the Massachusetts health reform of 2006, and employer-sponsored health insurance plans. She has also used cutting-edge techniques to estimate the value of medical spending on at-risk newborns. Anna Kratz, PhD, is Assistant Professor of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and the Center for Clinical Outcomes Development and Application (CODA) at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Dr. Kratz’s clinical research is focused on the characteristics and mechanisms of common symptoms (e.g. pain, fatigue, cognitive dysfunction) and functional outcomes in those with chronic clinical conditions.  Using a combination of ambulatory measurement methods of physical activity (actigraphy), heart rate variability, galvanic skin response, and self-reported experiences, her research aims to overlay the patient’s day-to-day experience with physiological markers of stress, sleep quality, and physical activity. She utilizes a number of computational approaches, including multilevel statistical modeling, signal processing, and machine learning to analyze these data. The ultimate goal is to use insights from these data to design better clinical interventions to help patients better manage symptoms and optimize functioning and quality of life. Prof. Aradhna Krishna is an American academic and behavioral scientist focused on persuasion. She studies how different aspects of product and communication design impact people’s perceptions and behavior. Her work has looked at decisions related to health and nutritio n, sensory and non-conscious ma rketing, food marketing, corporate social responsibility, and political decision making. She is consistently in the lists of the most productive marketing professors in the world. Harvard Business Review recently acknowledged her as “the foremost expert in the field of sensory marketing”.  She was awarded as a Fellow of the Society of Consumer Psychology, the organization’s highest honor, in recognition of her contributions to consumer psychology. My research examines the ways in which individuals and organizations use data to improve. Quality improvement and data-intensive research approaches are central to my work along with forming equitable collaborations between researchers and frontline workers. Prior to joining the Department of Learning Health Sciences, I was the Director of Learning Analytics Research at Digital Promise and a Senior Education Researcher in the Center for Technology in Learning at SRI International. At both organizations, I developed data-intensive research-practice partnerships with educational organizations of all types. As a learning scientist working at the intersection of data-intensive research and quality improvement, my colleagues and I have developed tools and strategies (e.g., cloud-based, open source tools for engaging in collaborative exploratory data analyses) that partnerships between researchers and practitioners can use to measure learning and improve learning environments. This is an image that my colleagues and I, over multiple projects, developed to communicate the multiple steps involved in collaborative data-intensive improvement. The “organize” and “understand” phases are about asking the right questions before the work of data analysis begins: “co-develop” and “test” are about taking action following an analysis. Along with identifying common phases, we have also observed the importance of the following supporting conditions: a trusting partnership, the use of formal improvement methods, common data workflows, and intentional efforts to support the learning of everyone involved in the project. Yanna Krupnikov uses large survey datasets to consider political attention and political expression. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: A Data Science Toolkit for Examining Local Governance What are some of your most interesting projects? How did you end up where you are today? What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? What are 1-3 interesting facts about yourself I work on photonic devices, mainly semiconductor based. Currently, my group are working on chip-scale spectrometers, quantum light sources, and tactile sensors. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Machine Learning Guided Co-design for Reconstructive Spectroscopy Synthetic polymers have been used as a molecular platform to develop host-defense antimicrobial peptide (AMP) mimics toward the development of “polymer antibiotics” which are effective in killing drug-resistant bacteria. Our research has been centered on the AMP-mimetic design and chemical optimization strategies as well as the biological and biophysical implications of AMP mimicry by synthetic polymers. The AMP-mimetic polymers showed broad-spectrum activity, rapid bactericidal activity, and low propensity for resistance development in bacteria, which represent the hallmarks of AMPs. The polymers form amphipathic conformations capable of membrane disruption upon binding to bacterial membrane, which recapitulates the folding of alpha-helical AMPs. We propose a new perception that AMP-mimetic polymers are an inherently bioactive platform as whole molecules, which mimic more than the side chain functionalities of AMPs. The chemical and structural diversity of polymers will expand the possibilities for new antimicrobial materials including macromolecules and molecular assemblies with tailored activity. This type of synthetic polymers is cost-effective, suitable for large-scale production, and tunable for diverse applications, providing great potential for the development of versatile platforms that can be used as direct therapeutics or attached on surfaces. Dr. Arpan Kusari has joined UMTRI as an Assistant Research Scientist, a position where he will bring his cutting-edge industry experience. Dr. Kusari has spent five years at Ford Motor Company researching exclusively on making autonomous vehicles safe and viable, working collaboratively with researchers from MIT and University of Michigan to advance the state-of-the-art knowledge in autonomous vehicles. His research interest spans through the spheres of sensing and perception; and decision-making and control, in the domain of autonomous vehicles. In the sensing and perception realm, his interests lie in uncertainty quantification and fault tolerance of a generic sensor suite. Dr. Kusari is also interested in utilizing noise reduction methods for designing cost-effective low SNR (signal-to-noise ratio) LiDARS. In decision making and control, he is focused on creating a robust framework capable of handling the uncertainty stemming from other road users’ behavior. In that regard, Dr. Kusari is pursuing development of methods for increasing the efficiency and robustness of probabilistic formalisms such as reinforcement learning and evolutionary algorithms to safely navigate the dynamic environment. His doctoral research was in LiDAR mapping in the areas of sensor calibration, precise estimation of earthquake displacement and uncertainty quantification in the point cloud. My research centers on studying the interaction between abstract, theoretically sound probabilistic algorithms and human beings. One aspect of my research explores connections of Machine Learning to Crowdsourcing and Economics; focused in both cases on better understanding the aggregation process. As Machine Learning algorithms are used in making decisions that affect human lives, I am interested in evaluating the fairness of Machine Learning algorithms as well as exploring various paradigms of fairness. I study how these notions interact with more traditional performance metrics. My research in Computer Science Education focuses on developing and using evidence-based techniques in educating undergraduates in Machine Learning. To this end, I have developed a pilot summer program to introduce students to current Machine Learning research and enable them to make a more informed decision about what role they would like research to play in their future. I have also mentored (and continue to mentor) undergraduate students and work with students to produce publishable, and award-winning, undergraduate research. We study and develop electrochemical devices containing organic materials for applications in grid energy storage and chemical separations (e.g., CO2 capture and nitrogen recovery). A critical aspect of our work involves discerning the impact of chemical reactions as well as mass and charge transport processes on device-level performance metrics. To accomplish this goal, we often conduct spectroscopic measurements of electrochemical systems while they are in operation. We apply a variety of mathematical modeling techniques to the spectroscopic data, such as multivariate curve resolution and Bayesian inference/model selection, to glean useful information about molecular transformation mechanisms and kinetics. These insights are informing closed-loop discovery of new and better-performing materials. My research interests are in the areas of brain-inspired machine intelligence and its applications such as mobile robots and autonomous vehicles. To achieve true machine intelligence, I have taken two different approaches: bottom-up data-driven and top-down theory-driven approach. For the bottom-up data-driven approach, I have investigated the neuronal structure of the brain to understand its function. The development of a high-throughput and high-resolution 3D tissue scanner was a keystone of this approach. This tissue scanner has a 3D virtual microscope that allows us to investigate the neuronal structure of a whole mammalian brain in a high resolution. The top-down theory-driven approach is to study what true machine intelligence is and how it can be implemented. True intelligence cannot be investigated without embracing the theory-driven approach such as self-awareness, embodiment, consciousness, and computational modeling. I have studied the internal dynamics of a neural system to investigate the self-awareness of a machine and model neural signal delay compensation. These two meet in the middle where machine intelligence is implemented for mechanical systems such as mobile robots and autonomous vehicles. I have a strong desire to bridge the bottom-up and top-down approaches that lead me to conduct research focusing on mobile robotics and autonomous vehicles to combine the data-driven and theory-driven approaches. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. High-Throughput and High-Resolution Tissue Scanner – NSF Funded Rahul Ladhania is an Assistant Professor of Health Informatics in the Department of Health Management &amp; Policy at the University of Michigan School of Public Health. He also has a secondary (courtesy) appointment with the Department of Biostatistics at SPH. Rahul’s research is in the area of causal inference and machine learning in public and behavioral health. A large body of his work focuses on estimating personalized treatment rules and heterogeneous effects of policy, digital and behavioral interventions on human behavior and health outcomes in complex experimental and observational settings using statistical machine learning methods. Rahul co-leads the Machine Learning team at the Behavior Change For Good Initiative (Penn), where he is working on two `mega-studies’ (very large multi-arm randomized trials): one in partnership with a national fitness chain, to estimate the effects of behavioral interventions on promoting gym visit habit formation; and the other in partnership with two large Mid-Atlantic health systems and a national pharmacy chain, to estimate the effects of text-based interventions on increasing flu shot vaccination rates. His other projects involve partnerships with step-counting apps and mobile-based games to learn user behavior patterns, and design and evaluate interventions and their heterogeneous effects on user behavior. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Equitable Models for Persistent Opioid Use Prediction and Personalization I am a Research Fellow in the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) at the University of Michigan. My research is currently supported by a NSF project, Developing Evidence-based Data Sharing and Archiving Policies, where I am analyzing curation activities, automatically detecting data citations, and contributing to metrics for tracking the impact of data reuse. I hold a Ph.D. in Geography from UC Santa Barbara and I have expertise in GIScience, spatial information science, and urban planning. My interests also include the Semantic Web, innovative GIS education, and the science of science. I have experience deploying geospatial applications, designing linked data models, and developing visualizations to support data discovery. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Images to Integrated Data: Piloting new methods to digitize, parse, and link historical records Jeffrey C. Lagarias is the Harold Mead Stark Collegiate Professor of Mathematics in the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Lagarias’ research interests are diverse. His initial training was in analytic and algebraic number theory. After receiving his PhD in 1974, he worked at Bell Laboratories and AT &T Labs until 2003, on problems in many pure and applied fields. Besides number theory, Prof. Lagarias has made contributions in harmonic analysis (wavelets and fractals), mathematical optimization (interior point methods), discrete geometry (tilings and quasicrystals), ergodic theory, low-dimensional topology (complexity of unknotting), and theoretical computer science. At Michigan Prof. Lagarias has been active in the number theory group over the last few years, with additional work in other fields. His last 25 postings on the arXiv were in: Number Theory (16), Dynamical Systems (3), Classical Analysis and ODE?s (3), Metric Geometry (1), Optimization and Control (1), Spectral Theory (1). His doctoral students typically work on their own topics. Some have worked in topics in number theory: integer factorial ratios, character sum estimates, Diophantine equations with two separated variables; Others have worked in topics in discrete geometry: packings of regular tetrahedra, rigidity of circle configurations. The overarching theme of Carl’s research for the past two decades is interoperability in information systems, spanning the full spectrum of the technical and human components that are critical to create networked information systems that really work. Although the results of this research apply across a variety of information contexts, the primary thread of my research explores information systems to support scholarship and knowledge production. The principal question he asks is: how do we build and sustain cyberinfrastructure that supports the full cycle scholarship and that respects the cultural, methodological, and social variance among fields of scholarship? Some relevant sub questions of this primary issue are: what are the methodological approaches and theoretical foundations relevant to understanding the nuanced variations and scholars’ attitudes towards technical cyberinfrastructure? And: how do we design technical cyberinfrastructure that simultaneously supports large-scale interoperability it respects the diversity scholarship? Finally: How do we accommodate multiple levels of expertise (e.g., citizen scientists) while maintaining quality and integrity? These are essential questions to him “At a time of significant investment in cyberinfrastructure by governments and funders and the emergence of critical scientific questions such as climate change and global pandemics, the investigation of which requires cross-disciplinary collaborations and cyberinfrastructure support.” My research focuses on the use and effectiveness of coaching and appreciation feedback in healthcare. I lead a team that develops a software-based precision feedback system to generate messages about performance to healthcare professionals and teams. My work involves the processing of performance data to detect signals of motivating information that can be delivered with algorithmically prioritized messages, to support performance improvement and sustainment. I lead the DISPLAY-Lab, which collaborates with researchers in a range of clinical and health-related domains, including biomedical informatics, implementation science, and human-centered design. All of my research and administrative projects have a component that focus on improving usability and decreasing burnout for healthcare providers.  We have been able to develop and study several tools that use well-timed and well-designed clinical decision support to improve patient care and decrease risk for patients on high-risk medications.  We have been fortunate to be able to use the data gathered during these implementations to make changes to the interface and workflows to continue to improve patient safety and support providers.  In particular, we are also excited about the potential of layering on a predictive model to help prioritize the alerts that are created for providers; at this time, most facilities do not have the staff to process all the alerts and prioritization is paramount to allow providers to help the most patients in the short amount of time they have. I have been at Michigan Medicine since medical school.  I did OB/GYN residency, REI fellowship here.  I am boarded in clinical informatics.  In 2019, I had the opportunity, given funding and administrative options in informatics, to step away from patient care, so 100% of my time is now focused on informatics projects. Larson’s research has been in the area of “Complex Fluids,” which include polymers, colloids, surfactant-containing fluids, liquid crystals, and biological macromolecules such as DNA, proteins, and lipid membranes. He has also contributed extensively to fluid mechanics, including microfluidics, and transport modeling. He has also has carried out research over the past 16 years in the area of molecular simulations for biomedical applications. The work has involved determining the structure and dynamics of lipid membranes, trans-membrane peptides, anti-microbial peptides, the conformation and functioning of ion channels, interactions of excipients with drugs for drug delivery, interactions of peptides with proteins including MHC molecules, resulting in more than 50 publications in these areas, and in the training of several Ph.D. students and postdocs. Many of these studies involve heavy use of computer simulations and methods of statistical analysis of simulations, including umbrella sampling, forward flux sampling, and metadynamics, which involve statistical weighting of results. He also has been engaged in analysis of percolation processes on lattices, including application to disease propagation. Alpha helical peptide bridging lipid bilayer in molecular dynamics simulations of “hydrophobic mismatch.” Dr. Lavieri’s group is focused on creating novel modeling frameworks that utilize the rich datasets available in healthcare to personalize screening, monitoring, and treatment decisions of chronic disease patients. Her group has also created models for health workforce and capacity planning. Dr. Le is an assistant research scientist at the University of Michigan Department of Health Management and Policy. Dr Le is also a member of the UM/Georgetown TCORS Center for the Assessment of Tobacco Regulations (CAsToR). Dr. Le is interested in mathematical modeling for cancer- and tobacco-related problems, and machine-learning applications in tobacco regulatory science. Dr. Le has developed mathematical models to evaluate the benefits and harms of breast cancer mammography and predict the number of white blood cells during acute lymphoblastic maintenance therapy in children. Dr. Le’s recent work focuses on employing mathematical models to quantify the burden of menthol cigarettes on public health and estimate the smoking cessation rate. Dr. Le is working on applying machine learning techniques to predict and understand smoking behaviors. Jon’s research focus is on nonlinear discrete optimization (NDO). Many practical engineering problems have physical aspects which are naturally modeled through smooth nonlinear functions, as well as design aspects which are often modeled with discrete variables. Research in NDO seeks to marry diverse techniques from classical areas of optimization, for example methods for smooth nonlinear optimization and methods for integer linear programming, with the idea of successfully attacking natural NDO models for practical engineering problems.  On particular area of applied interest is environmental monitoring and the framework of maximum-entropy sampling. Dr. Lee’s research interests lie in machine learning and its applications to artificial intelligence. In particular, he focuses on deep learning and representation learning, which aims to learn an abstract representation of the data by a hierarchical and compositional structure. His research also spans over related topics, such as graphical models, optimization, and large-scale learning. Specific application areas include computer vision, audio recognition, robotics, text modeling, and healthcare. My research focuses on issues in data collection with hard-to-reach populations. In particular, she examines 1) nontraditional sampling approaches for minority or stigmatized populations and their statistical properties and 2) measurement error and comparability issues for racial, ethnic and linguistic minorities, which also have implications for cross-cultural research/survey methodology. Most recently, my research has been dedicated to respondent driven sampling that uses existing social networks to recruit participants in both face-to-face and Web data collection settings. I plan to expand my research scope in examining representation issues focusing on the racial/ethnic minority groups in the U.S. in the era of big data. Prof. Lenk develops Bayesian models that disaggregate data to address individuals.  He also studies Bayesian nonparametric methods and currently consider shape constraints.  Prof. Lenk teaches and uses data mining methods such as recursive partition and neural networks. I am an expert in the use of artificial intelligence and data science applications to improve medication use. My work focuses on solving medication-related problems with health data through measurement of their effects on human work and decision-making. Margaret C. Levenstein, PhD, is the Director of ICPSR , Co-Director, Michigan Federal Statistical Research Data Center , Research Professor, School of Information , Research Professor, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research , and Adjunct Professor of Business Economics and Public Policy, Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Elizaveta (Liza) Levina and her group work on various questions arising in the statistical analysis of large and complex data, especially networks and graphs. Our current focus is on developing rigorous and computationally efficient statistical inference on realistic models for networks. Current directions include community detection problems in networks (overlapping communities, networks with additional information about the nodes and edges, estimating the number of communities), link prediction (networks with missing or noisy links, networks evolving over time), prediction with data connected by a network (e.g., the role of friendship networks in the spread of risky behaviors among teenagers), and statistical analysis of samples of networks with applications to brain imaging, especially fMRI data from studies of mental health). My research interests are in natural language semantics and psycholinguistics, focusing on verbs. I conduct behavioral psycholinguistic experiments with methodologies such as self-paced reading and maze tasks, as well as surveys of linguistic and semantic judgments. I also study semantic variation using corpora and datasets such as the Twitter Decahose, to better understand how words have developed diverging meanings in different communities, age groups, or regions. I use primarily R and Python to collect, manage, and analyze data. I direct the UM WordLab in the linguistics department, working with students (especially undergraduates) on experimental and computational research focusing on lexical representations. Jun Li, PhD, is Assistant Professor in the department of Technology and Operations in the Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Jun Li’s main research interests are empirical operations management and business analytics, with special emphases on revenue management, pricing, consumer behavior, economic and social networks. She has worked extensively with large-scale data, including transactions, pricing, inventory and capacity, consumer online search and click stream data, supply chain relationships and disruptions, clinical and healthcare claims. She is the Winner  of INFORMS Revenue Management and Pricing Practice Award for her close collaboration with retailing practitioners in implementing best response pricing algorithms. Her paper on airline pricing and consumer behavior is the finalist for Best Management Science Papers in Operations Management 2012 to 2014. She is also the principal investigator of a National Science Foundation funded project: “Gaining Visibility Into Supply Network Risks Using Large-Scale Textual Analysis”. Her work has enjoyed coverage by The Economist, New York Times and Forbes. Supply Chain Risk Events Jun Li, PhD, is Professor and Chair for Research in the department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics and Professor of Human Genetics in the Medical School at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Li’s areas of interest include genetic and genomic analyses of complex phenotypes, including bipolar disorder, cancer, blood clotting disease, and traits involving animal models and human microbiomes. Our approach emphasizes statistical analysis of genome-scale datasets (e.g, gene expression and genotyping data, results from next-generation sequencing), evolutionary history, bioinformatics, and pattern recognition. Accomplishments and Awards Atlas of the human ovary offers huge potential for new treatments Dr. Gen Li is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Biostatistics. He is devoted to developing new statistical methods for analyzing complex biomedical data, including multi-way tensor array data, multi-view data, and compositional data. His methodological research interests include dimension reduction, predictive modeling, association analysis, and functional data analysis. He also has research interests in scientific domains including microbiome and genomics. Novel tree-guided regularization methods can identify important microbial features at different taxonomic ranks that are predictive of the clinical outcome. Max’s research interests lies in the design, management, and optimization of large-scale infrastructure systems, focusing on the air transportation system and emerging aerial mobility systems. He is interested in the application of methods applicable to networked systems, especially with resource constraints (e.g., airspace and airport capacity), diverse stakeholders (e.g., passenger-centric, airline-centric), and complex dynamics (e.g., changing temporal behaviors). Max has worked on a variety of data-driven problems related to analyzing flight delays across airport networks, strategic/tactical air traffic management and delay assignments, privacy and routing in drone-based applications, and uncertainty-aware traffic management. He is interested in methods such as graph signal processing and signal processing over non-Euclidean domains, data-driven optimization, mixed-integer/integer/combinatorial programs, resilient network design, and stochastic optimization. Broadly, Max hopes to contribute to a safe, resilient, and efficient air transportation system (inclusive of intra- and inter-city modalities) within the context of a passenger’s (or cargo’s) door-to-door journey. Image: A flight delay assignment mechanism that does not rely on knowing the exact value of an airline’s private per-flight valuation of flight delays. The mechanism requires the system capacities/demand per round, and computes an initial solution. This solution is adjusted by a Coordinating Airline using privatized information from Participating Airlines. The resultant solution is proposed, and any negative public delays incurred is recorded to a ledger. The role of Coordinating/Participating Airlines then rotate depending on the current ledger balance. What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? Working with air traffic controllers and traffic flow managers to deploy/prototype a congestion management solution/model! What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? The potential positive impact on the air transportation system, and helping to make it more efficient and equitable in terms of access. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: From ground to air, and the traveler experiences in-between: Human-centered data-driven performance measures for multimodal transportation systems My research focuses on developing advanced numerical models and computational tools to enhance our understanding and prediction capabilities for both terrestrial and extraterrestrial climate systems. By leveraging the power of data science, I aim to unravel the complexities of atmospheric dynamics and climate processes on Earth, as well as on other planets such as Mars, Venus, and Jupiter. My approach involves the integration of large-scale datasets, including satellite observations and ground-based measurements, with statistical methods and sophisticated machine learning algorithms including vision-based large models. This enables me to extract meaningful insights and improve the accuracy of climate models, which are crucial for weather forecasting, climate change projections, and planetary exploration. Dr. Jiaqi Li’s research interests include industrial decarbonization of materials, such as concrete and hydrogen, for civil and energy infrastructure through the use and generation of renewable energy and carbon capture, utilization, and storage. His research uses in-house experimental results to validate modelling work and uses machine learning tools such as regression, clustering, network analysis, decision tree and deep learning model to advance the materials characterization, optimization, and design. His interest also lies in integrating renewable energy use and generation with carbon capture, utilization, and storage for making carbon-negative cement and concrete at scale. The most significant scientific contribution Dr.Li would like to make is in decarbonizing the global energy and construction industries at the gigaton scale annually in cost-effective scalable approaches. My research focused on using computational approaches and spatial and social network methods to advance understanding and solutions for contemporary urban challenges. My current research has two themes: 1) examining how urban network infrastructure (e.g., transportation, social, or digital infrastructure) can simultaneously be inclusive and exclusive, offering connectivity and access for certain populations, places, or types of flows, while marginalizing or restricting others, 2) exploring how data, technology, and AI can support, transform, or challenge planning practices and public services. My approaches are largely inspired by the field of network science, complex systems, and critical & participatory approaches in GIS and planning, thus grounding my research in the pursuit of a diverse, equitable, and sustainable network society. A few of my projects are detailed below. Project 1: The process of identifying vacant, abandoned, and disinvested properties is challenging for cities that want to acquire them for redevelopment. In [a paper]( https://journals.sagepub.com/eprint/4PZVYRJYYYE3UKG7IBGJ/full ), my team created a human-in-the-loop machine learning (HITLML) model and applied it to a parcel-level case study in Savannah, Georgia. We found that Human-in-the-loop ML (HITLML) exceeds the standard ML by a wide margin when the predictions are validated against third-party sources (e.g., the city’s survey or USPS vacancy records). The predictions also differ from those from human practices. Since the Human-in-the-loop ML only requires a small training sample to generate standardized, accurate, reliable, and robust predictions. It is particularly good for cities that lack an unbiased, large-scale dataset for ML, are ready to maintain and upgrade their digital infrastructures, and seek an alternative approach to evaluate their existing workflow. Project 2: Do more connected cities produce more patents than others with similar GDP, population, and education? In [a paper]( https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0198971524000218 ), my team measured intercity connectivity with three networks (social media, mobility, and scientific collaboration) for the two largest economies, China and the US. Our results indicate that even though big cities have advantages in producing complex patents due to their dominant positions in multiple networks, small cities may catch up if they improve their intercity connectivity. Causal relationships need to be further tested. Still, the correlation poses interesting questions about the future of cities marginalized/outperforming in intercity networks, such as small cities dedicated to tourism (for enhanced mobility flows) and digital nomads (for enhanced digital connectivity), or those fly-over towns that are losing tractions in both population and ideas alike. I started college studying Sociology and then ventured into Computational Science as I became fascinated by complex systems. I found urban planning my home for PhD because I love how cities are the perfect ground to land my passion for using computational and data-driven approaches to create tangible social impacts. Our cities are becoming more connected, and yet the increased connections and their associated growth of urban infrastructure can encode inequality and exclusion. I am dedicated to developing a more nuanced understanding of our urban network infrastructure under the lens of “network duality”, thinking about when and how an urban network infrastructure becomes inclusive and exclusive to certain populations, places, or types of flows, and how to contest the negative impacts coming from duality. I also want to contribute to understanding how AI development is rapidly reshaping the opportunities and challenges in the planning practices and public sectors. The areas of work in these fields are often high-stake and require better practices and frameworks for governance. With a background in human-computer interaction and AI ethics, Dr. Vera Lioa’s research investigates the risks of emerging AI technologies, and aims to mitigate the risks through responsible development processes and human-centered design interventions. She is particularly interested in promoting transparency of AI technologies (e.g. through explainability, uncertainty and risk communication, and sound evaluation) to ensure human oversight, control, appropriate trust, and other important goals of stakeholders. Dr. Li’s research focuses on new search method to solve the traveling salesman problem (TSP). More specially, this new method uses multi-start local search to construct the solution attractor, search all solutions in the attractor, and then identify the globally optimal solution. He has used this method to tackle classic TSP, multi-objective TSP, dynamic TSP, and probabilistic TSP. The concepts of search trajectories and solution attractor in a multi-start local search system. Yi Li is a Professor of Biostatistics and Director of the Kidney Epidemiology and Cost Center. His current research interests are survival analysis, longitudinal and correlated data analysis, measurement error problems, spatial models and clinical trial designs. He is developing methodologies for analyzing large-scale andhigh-dimensional datasets, with direct applications inobservational studies as well in genetics/genomics. His methodologic research is funded by various federal grants starting from year 2003. Yi Li is actively involved in collaborative research in clinical trials and observational studies with researchers from the University of Michigan and Harvard University. The applications have included chronic kidney disease surveillance, organ transplantation, cancer preventive studies and cancer genomics. Dr. Likosky is a Professor, Head of the Section of Health Services Research and Quality in the Department of Cardiac Surgery at Michigan Medicine and faculty member at the Center for Healthcare Outcomes and Policy. Dr. Likosky’s work currently focuses on leveraging: (i) mobile health technology to identify objective and scalable measures for mitigating post-surgical morbidities, and (ii) computer vision to identify objective and scalable measures of important intraoperative technical skills and non-technical practices. Dr. Brian Lin has 12 years of experience in automotive research at UMTRI after his Ph.D. His current research is focused on mining naturalistic driving data, evaluating driver assistance systems, modeling driver performance and behavior, and estimating driver distraction and workload, using statistical methods, classification, clustering, and survival analysis. His most recent work includes classifying human driver’s decision for a discretionary lane change and traversal at unsignalized intersections, driver’s response to lead vehicle’s movement, and subjective acceptance on automated lane change feature. Dr. Lin also has much experience applying data analytic methods to evaluate automotive system prototypes, including auto-braking, lane departure, driver-state monitoring, electronic head units, car-following and curve-assist systems on level-2 automation, and lane-change and intersection assist on L3 automation on public roads, test tracks, or driving simulators. He is also familiar with the human factors methods to investigate driver distraction, workload, and human-machine interaction with in-vehicle technologies and safety features. He serves as a peer reviewer for Applied Ergonomics, Behavior Research Methods, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles and Transportation Research Part F. Dr. Lin conducts research on the physical and orbital characteristics of minor planets within the solar system, including asteroids and Kuiper belt objects. His methodologies involve astrometry, photometry, and spectroscopy. Additionally, he employs large astronomical sky survey data and designs custom surveys to sample specific populations of minor planets for the purpose of establishing population models. This information contributes to our comprehension of the solar system’s evolution. As an observational astronomer, my primary research interests lie in the exploration and characterization of minor planets within and beyond our solar system. My work encompasses: Discovery of Distant Minor Planets: I actively engage in the search for distant minor planet populations that serve as a fossil record of our solar system. These remote bodies offer invaluable insights into the formation and evolutionary history of our celestial neighborhood. Physical Characterization of Minor Planets: I investigate the physical properties of a diverse range of minor planets—including asteroids and interstellar objects—by analyzing parameters such as size, surface colors, and spectral characteristics. This research provides a deeper understanding of their composition, formation processes, and evolutionary trajectories. Application of Machine Learning in Astronomical Measurements: I develop and implement advanced computational and machine learning methodologies to enhance the analysis of astronomical data, thereby improving the efficiency and accuracy of detecting minor planets and quantifying their properties. Together, these research foci form a cohesive strategy that is charting new territories in our solar system. By combining systematic searches, detailed physical characterizations, and innovative computational techniques, my work aims to advance our understanding of the dynamic, diverse, and ever-surprising nature of minor planets. The spatial distribution of two distinct distant minor planet populations in our solar system. Orange: Plutinos—objects with orbits similar to Pluto’s, residing in a 3:2 mean motion resonance with Neptune. Blue: Neptune Trojans, which share Neptune’s orbit under a 1:1 mean motion resonance. Green: The Sun. Red: Neptune. One of my most exciting projects involves linking the surface colors of distant minor planets to their spectral types. The spectra of these objects are highly informative; by examining the abundance of various ices—such as water ice, methane ice, and carbon dioxide ice—we can infer their likely formation locations, since each ice has a unique sublimation temperature. However, obtaining these spectra is challenging, often requiring hours of observation time on the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) for just a single object. In contrast, surface colors, while less detailed, still carry valuable information about an object’s surface composition. Moreover, these colors are much easier to obtain. With survey telescopes like the Vera C. Rubin Observatory set to capture data for thousands of asteroids, we have the opportunity to significantly expand our dataset. Our recent study, which combined surface color measurements from ground-based telescopes with spectral data from JWST, found a strong correlation between surface colors and the spectral types of distant minor planets. This breakthrough means that we can potentially infer the formation positions of thousands of these objects based solely on their colors, ultimately improving our understanding of how our solar system formed. Here are a couple of fun facts about me: Asteroid Honor: I have an asteroid named after me—11462 Hsingwenlin (1981 ES23). I believe this honor came about because the discoverer wanted to promote the contributions of East Asian solar system astronomers. This unique badge of honor in the astronomical community constantly reminds me of the vast cosmos I study. Unexpected Path: Early in my academic journey, I applied for computer science and electronic engineering majors. Unfortunately, my applications were unsuccessful due to my lower English proficiency at the time (that is less relevant now, thanks to LLMs). This setback unexpectedly steered me toward physics and astronomy, and eventually led me to work with computers and AI. Mark Lindquist, ASLA, PhD, is an Associate Professor of Landscape Architecture. His research focuses on designing and evaluating high-performance landscapes with an emphasis on multifunctional green infrastructure in urban areas and leveraging AI for the creation and evaluation of these environments. He is particularly interested in understanding how engaging with computation, data, and virtual and augmented reality can transform the design process and inform decision-making by stakeholders. Lindquist uses video game technology and conducts empirical research with the aim of providing an evidence base to support the design and planning of environments that perform ecologically, socially, and culturally for more sustainable outcomes. Research in the Lindsey Lab focuses on using simulation to enable on-demand design, discovery, and synthesis of bespoke materials. These efforts are made possible by Dr. Lindsey’s ChIMES framework, which comprises a unique physics-informed machine-learned (ML) interatomic potential (IAP) and artificial intelligence-automated development tool that enables “quantum accurate” simulation of complex systems on scales overlapping with experiment, with atomistic resolution. Using this tool, her group elucidates fundamental materials behavior and properties that can be manipulated through advanced material synthesis and modification techniques. At the same time, her group develops new approaches to overcome grand challenges in machine learning for physical sciences and engineering, including: training set generation, model uncertainty quantification, reproducibility and automation, robustness, and accessibility to the broader scientific community. Her also group seeks to understand what the models themselves can teach us about fundamental physics and chemistry. Artists interpretation of a new laser-driven shockwave approach for nanocarbon synthesis predicted by ChIMES simulations and later validated experimentally. The objective of our work is to develop predictive theories of surface chemistry related to heterogeneous catalysis, electrocatalysis and photocatalysis. We are currently working on a number of projects in the fields of sustainable energy generation and conversion, functional nanomaterials, fundamental and applied heterogeneous catalysis. We use a range of experimental techniques including those aimed at performance assessment, kinetic analysis of chemical transformations, in operando spectroscopy, and electron microscopy. These experimental techniques are combined with first principles theoretical tools such as electronic structure calculations (DFT), ab initio kinetics and thermodynamics, and optical simulations. Accomplishments and Awards University of Michigan Team Developing Reactor to Convert Natural Gas to Industrial Chemicals 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Interpretable Machine Learning for Identifying Descriptors of Catalysts for Chemical Conversion Roderick Joseph Little, PhD, is the Richard D. Remington Distinguished University Professor of Biostatistics, Professor of Statistics, Research Professor, Institute for Social Research, and Senior Fellow, Michigan Society of Fellows, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Little’s primary research interest is the analysis of data sets with missing values. Many statistical techniques are designed for complete, rectangular data sets, but in practice biostatistical data sets contain missing values, either by design or accident. As detailed in my book with Rubin, initial statistical approaches were relatively ad-hoc, such as discarding incomplete cases or substituting means, but modern methods are increasingly based on models for the data and missing-data mechanism, using likelihood-based inferential techniques. Another interest is the analysis of data collected by complex sampling designs involving stratification and clustering of units. Since working as a statistician for the World Fertility Survey, I have been interested in the development of model-based methods for survey analysis that are robust to misspecification, reasonably efficient, and capable of implementation in applied settings. Statistics is philosophically fascinating and diverse in application. My inferential philosophy is model-based and Bayesian, although the effects of model misspecification need careful attention. My applied interests are broad, including mental health, demography, environmental statistics, biology, economics and the social sciences as well as biostatistics. Henry Liu, PhD, is Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering in the College of Engineering and holds a secondary appointment of Research Professor in the U-M Transportation Research Institute (UMTRI). Prof. Liu is also Director of the Center for Connected and Automated Transportation (Regional 5 UTC). Prof. Liu’s research is in the areas of traffic network monitoring, modeling and control. His recent work has focused on traffic flow modeling and simulation, traffic signal control and optimization, traffic management under network disruptions and equilibrium traffic assignment. Prof. Liu is the co-founder and chairman of the advisory board for SMART Signal Technologies. The SMART Signal (Systematic Monitoring of Arterial Road Traffic Signals) is a real-time arterial performance monitoring system that uses traffic data from existing signal systems. SMART Signal simultaneously collects event-based high-resolution traffic data from multiple intersections and generates real-time signal performance measures, including arterial travel time, number of stops, queue length, intersection delay and level of service. “Traffic engineers can use this information to improve traffic flow on roads controlled by traffic lights—reducing congestion and saving drivers both time and fuel. SMART Signal could also give drivers a more accurate prediction of travel times by accounting for time spent waiting at traffic lights,” states the University of Minnesota Intelligent Transportation Systems website. The system is now deployed at more than 100 intersections on major arterial corridors in Minnesota and Pasadena, California. Arterial corridors are roads where many cars can move from urban centers to high-capacity freeways. Accomplishments and Awards Tired of all the red lights? Traffic technology could speed up your commute Mingyan Liu, PhD, is Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, College of Engineering, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Liu’s research interest lies in optimal resource allocation, sequential decision theory, online and machine learning, performance modeling, analysis, and design of large-scale, decentralized, stochastic and networked systems, using tools including stochastic control, optimization, game theory and mechanism design. Her most recent research activities involve sequential learning, modeling and mining of large scale Internet measurement data concerning cyber security, and incentive mechanisms for inter-dependent security games. Within this context, her research group is actively working on the following directions. 1. Cyber security incident forecast. The goal is to predict an organization’s likelihood of having a cyber security incident in the near future using a variety of externally collected Internet measurement data, some of which capture active maliciousness (e.g., spam and phishing/malware activities) while others capture more latent factors (e.g., misconfiguration and mismanagement). While machine learning techniques have been extensively used for detection in the cyber security literature, using them for prediction has rarely been done. This is the first study on the prediction of broad categories of security incidents on an organizational level. Our work to date shows that with the right choice of feature set, highly accurate predictions can be achieved with a forecasting window of 6-12 months. Given the increasing amount of high profile security incidents (Target, Home Depot, JP Morgan Chase, and Anthem, just to name a few) and the amount of social and economic cost they inflict, this work will have a major impact on cyber security risk management. 2. Detect propagation in temporal data and its application to identifying phishing activities. Phishing activities propagate from one network to another in a highly regular fashion, a phenomenon known as fast-flux, though how the destination networks are chosen by the malicious campaign remains unknown. An interesting challenge arises as to whether one can use community detection methods to automatically extract those networks involved in a single phishing campaign; the ability to do so would be critical to forensic analysis. While there have been many results on detecting communities defined as subsets of relatively strongly connected entities, the phishing activity exhibits a unique propagating property that is better captured using an epidemic model. By using a combination of epidemic modeling and regression we can identify this type of propagating community with reasonable accuracy; we are working on alternative methods as well. 3. Data-driven modeling of organizational and end-user security posture. We are working to build models that accurately capture the cyber security postures of end-users as well as organizations, using large quantities of Internet measurement data. One domain is on how software vendors disclose security vulnerabilities in their products, how they deploy software upgrades and patches, and in turn, how end users install these patches; all these elements combined lead to a better understanding of the overall state of vulnerability of a given machine and how that relates to user behaviors. Another domain concerns the interconnectedness of today’s Internet which implies that what we see from one network is inevitably related to others. We use this connection to gain better insight into the conditions of not just a single network viewed in isolation, but multiple networks viewed together. A predictive analytics approach to forecasting cyber security incidents. We start from Internet-scale measurement on the security postures of network entities. We also collect security incident reports to use as labels in a supervised learning framework. The collected data then goes through extensive processing and domain-specific feature extraction. Features are then used to train a classifier that generates predictions when we input new features, on the likelihood of a future incident for the entity associated with the input features. We are also actively seeking to understand the causal relationship among different features and the security interdependence among different network entities. Lastly, risk prediction helps us design better incentive mechanisms which is another facet of our research in this domain. Dr. Liu’s research lab aims to develop machine learning approaches for real-world bioinformatics and medical informatics problems. We believe that computational methods are essential in order to understand many of these molecular biology problems, including the dynamics of genome conformation and nuclear organization, gene regulation, cellular networks, and the genetic basis of human diseases. The first computational embedding method for single cells in terms of their chromatin organization. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Building a genomic literature knowledgebase My research focuses on quantitative modeling approaches that help business or nonprofit institutions make efficient operational decisions. My research addresses decisions that are made: 1) on either a single independent operation or multiple integrated operations, and 2) by either a single party or multiple parties, most likely different supply chain members. I am specifically interested in the allocation of resources over time and/or among different parties, which often involve scheduling, i.e., the allocation of resources over time to optimize certain objectives, capacity allocation, i.e., the allocation of production capacity from supplier to retailers in a supply chain setting, and pricing, i.e., the determination of selling price of certain products. When multiple parties are involved, decisions can be made either cooperatively or non-cooperatively. The methodologies used in my work include game theory, real analysis, optimization, approximation, simulation, and statistics. My research is at the intersection of neuroscience and artificial intelligence. My group uses neuroscience or brain-inspired principles to design models and algorithms for computer vision and language processing. In turn, we uses neural network models to test hypotheses in neuroscience and explain or predict human perception and behaviors. My group also develops and uses machine learning algorithms to improve the acquisition and analysis of medical images, including functional magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and magnetic resonance imaging of the gut. We use brain-inspired neural networks models to predict and decode brain activity in humans processing information from naturalistic audiovisual stimuli. My primary career interest is making new discoveries through creative thinking and innovative investigations. My long term research interests in the molecular mechanisms of heart regeneration to effectively prolong and improve the lives of heart patients, particularly in the development of a comprehensive understanding of post-translational/epigenetics regulation for cardiac reprogramming based heart therapy. I am developing a novel concept for a post-translational modification (PTM) code that is applicable across different proteins. I am utilizing computational methods to gain insights into the functional implications of PTMs that transcend protein boundaries. My research focuses on natural hazards and disaster information, everything from understanding where disaster data comes from, how it’s used, and its implications to design improved disaster information systems that prioritize the human experience and lead to more effective and equitable outcomes. My lab takes a user-centered and data-driven approach. We aim to understand user needs and the effect of data on users’ decisions through qualitative research, such as focus groups or workshops. We then design new information systems through geospatial/GIS analysis, risk analysis, and statistical modeling techniques. We often work with earth observation, sensor, and survey data. We consider various aspects of disaster information, whether it be the hazard, its physical impacts, its social impacts, or a combination of the three. I also focus on the communication of information, through data visualization techniques, and host a Risk and Resilience DAT/Artathon to build data visualization capacity for early career professionals. I am interested in the evolutionary processes that originate “mega-diverse” biotic assemblages and the role of ecology in shaping the evolution of diversity. My program studies the evolution of Neotropical freshwater fishes, the most diverse freshwater fish fauna on earth, with an estimate exceeding 7,000 species. My lab combines molecular phylogenetics and phylogeny-based comparative methods to integrate ecology, functional morphology, life histories and geography into analyses of macroevolutionary patterns of freshwater fish diversification. We are also comparing patterns of diversification across major Neotropical fish clades. Relying on fieldwork and natural history collections, we use methods that span My current research interest is focused on improving efficiency and utilization of outpatient clinics, using data mining techniques such as decision tree analysis, Bayesian networks, neural networks, and similar techniques.  While our previous and continuing research have been focused on using some of these techniques to develop more sophisticated methods of patients scheduling within physical therapy clinics, we can see the applicability of the techniques to other types of health services providers.  There is also applicability to university administration in developing predictive models using data mining techniques for assessing student success. Dr. Jin Lu is an Assistant Professor of Computer and Information Science at the University of Michigan, Dearborn. His major research interests include machine learning, data mining, optimization, matrix analysis, biomedical informatics, and health informatics. Two main directions are being pursued: (1) Large-scale machine learning problems with data heterogeneity. Data heterogeneity is common across many high-impact application domains, ranging from recommendation system to Computer Vision, Bioinformatics and Health-informatics. Such heterogeneity can be present in a variety of forms, including (a) sample heterogeneity, where multiple resources of data samples are available as side information; (b) task heterogeneity, where multiple related learning tasks can be jointly learned to improve the overall performance; (c) view heterogeneity, where complementary information is available from various sources. My research interests focus on building efficient machine learning methods from such data heterogeneity, aiming to improve the learning model by making the best use of all data resources. (2) Machine learning methods with provable guarantees. Machine learning has been substantially developed and has demonstrated great success in various domains. Despite its practical success, many of the applications involve solving NP-hard problems based on heuristics. It is challenging to analyze whether a heuristic scheme has any theoretical guarantee. My research interest is to employ granular data structure, e.g. sample clusters or features describing an aspect of the sample, to design new theoretically-sound models and algorithms for machine learning problems. Dr. Lu brings expertise in machine learning, particularly integrating human knowledge into machine learning and explainable machine learning. He has applied machine learning in a range of domain applications, such as autonomous driving and machine learning for optimized design and control of energy storage systems. We use a variety of quantitative imaging methods, ranging from single cells to clinical studies, to investigate cancer signaling and response to therapy over space and time. We develop image analysis methods to extract data from thousands of single cells over time and voxel-wise measurements of imaging parameters. We also use bulk and single-cell RNA sequencing to investigate heterogeneity among cancer cells and changes induced by intercellular interactions. A current goal of our ongoing work is to merge RNA sequencing and imaging data to understand cell decision making in cancer. We collaborate with investigators using machine learning and computational modeling approaches to inform cell signaling and resultant behaviors in tumor growth and metastasis. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Discovering Causes of Cancer Recurrence Through Inverse Reinforcement Learning As an expert in molecular imaging of single cell signaling in cancer, I develop integrated systems of molecular, cellular, optical, and custom image processing tools to extract rich data sets for biochemical and behavioral functions in living cells over minutes to days. Data sets composed of thousands to millions of cells enable us to develop predictive models of cellular function through a variety of computational approaches, including ODE, ABM, and IRL modeling. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Discovering Causes of Cancer Recurrence Through Inverse Reinforcement Learning Di Ma is currently an Associate Professor in the Computer and Information Science (CIS) Department, College of Engineering and Computer Science (CECS), at the University of Michigan-Dearborn . She is also serving as the Interim Associate Dean for Graduate Education and Research and the director of the Cybersecurity Center for Education, Research, and Outreach, CECS. Dr. Ma received her PhD degree from the University of California, Irvine, in 2009. She is the recipient of the Trevor O. Jones Outstanding Paper Award from the Society of Automobile Engineers (SAE) in 2019, the Distinguished Research Award from CECS in 2017, and the Tan Kah Kee Young Inventor Award in 2004. She is broadly interested in the general area of security, privacy, and applied cryptography. Her research spans a wide range of topics, including connected and autonomous vehicle security, smartphone and mobile device security, RFID and sensor security, data privacy, and so on. Her research is supported by NSF, NHTSA, AFOSR, Intel, Ford, and Research in Motion. She was with IBM Almaden Research Center in 2008 and the Institute for Infocomm Research , Singapore in 2000-2005 My research interests lie in the intersection of database management systems (DBMSs) and machine learning (ML), especially using ML/AI techniques to automate database administration/tuning to remove human impediments. My research focuses on developing reliable and efficient machine learning methods for causal inference as well as predictive models that leverage causal reasoning. My work typically involves applications to healthcare. Accomplishments and Awards Maggie Makar receives NSF CAREER Award to develop machine learning models backed by causal reasoning My interest is in using econometrics, especially Bayesian econometrics, and machine learning methods to infer causality. I tend to work with mostly parametric models of firm and consumer behavior to assess the effectiveness of firm actions. My work spans a variety of industries such as pharmaceuticals, e-commerce, gaming and hi-technology. Accomplishments and Awards New U-M study explores video game addiction rates My research interests concern solar magnetism and magnetic flux transport from the convection zone into the corona, and through the heliosphere.In this context, I have contributed to basic theory and modeling efforts with analytical work and large-scale numerical simulations. The topics that I am particularly interested in are: magnetic flux emergence, magnetohydrodynamic instabilities, coronal mass ejection (CME) initiation, propagation, and CME-driven shocks. Flux emergence was the topic of my Ph.D. thesis research, which demonstrated that the expansion of magnetic fields in a gravitationally stratified atmosphere naturally produces Lorentz forces that drive shear flows. These flows lead to the formation of highly energized coronal magnetic fields, which are observed to be at the epicenter of coronal eruptions. This work provides a fundamental explanation for shear flows, which for decades, have been prescribed as ad hoc boundary conditions in numerical models of CMEs, flares and filament eruptions. While at the University of Michigan, I have advanced this fundamental theory of CME initiation by simulating the eruption of both magnetic arcades and flux ropes by such self-induced shear flows. I conceived and implemented the Gibson-Low flux rope as a way of simulating coronal mass ejections and applied this model to study the the propagation of CMEs from the solar corona through the heliosphere. In doing so, many new aspects of CME interaction with the interplanetary medium were discovered. With coauthors, I demonstrated the model’s capability to predict ICME disturbances at Earth, and advised my student, Meng Jin, in developing data-driven tool, EEGGL, which prescribe the model’s parameters and is now installed at CCMC. I am now working with faculty in the University of Michigan Department of Statistics to apply machine learning to classify and predict flare events and to identify the underlying physical processes. Three series of plates at times t =50:0, 57.2, and 72.8 illustrating the expansion of the flux rope from the photosphere into the corona. Panels a–f show the x=0 plane, where the direction of the magnetic field (confined to the plane) is depicted with solid white lines. Panels a–c show a color representation of the shear velocity Ux, while panels d–f show color images of the shear angle measured in degrees. Panels g–i show three-dimensional representations of the magnetic field lines, color coded as described in the text. Panels g and i show color images of the vertical field strength Bz at the photosphere. Panel h shows a color image of the shear velocity at the photosphere, along with co-spatial vectors that indicate the magnitude and direction of the flow. Iso-surfaces of Ux are shown colored in blue (-20 km/s) and red (+20km/s). Reference: Astrophysical Journal, 610:588–596, 2004 Professor Manduca’s research focuses on urban and regional economic development, asking why some cities and regions prosper while others decline, how federal policy influences urban fortunes, and how neighborhood social and economic conditions shape life outcomes. He studies these topics using computer simulations, spatial clustering methods, network analysis, and data visualization. In other work he explores the consequences of rising income inequality for various aspects of life in the United States, using descriptive methods and simulations applied to Census microdata. This research has shown how rising inequality has lead directly to lower rates of upward mobility and increases in the racial income gap. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch, Fall 2021 Screenshot from “ Where Are The Jobs? ” visualization mapping every job in the United States based on the unemployment insurance records from the Census LODES data. Murali Mani, PhD, is Professor of Computer Science at the University of Michigan, Flint. The significant research problems Prof. Mani is investigating include the following: big data management, big data analytics and visualization, provenance, query processing of encrypted data, event stream processing, XML stream processing. data modeling using XML schemas, and effective computer science education. In addition, he has worked in industry on clickstream analytics (2015), and on web search engines (1999-2000). Prof. Mani’s significant publications are listed on DBLP at: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/pers/hd/m/Mani:Murali. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch, Fall 2021 Illustrating how our SMART system effectively integrates big data processing and data visualization to enable big data visualization. The left side shows a typical data visualization scenario, where the different analysts are using their different visualization systems. These visualization systems can provide interactive visualizations but cannot handle the complexities of big data. They interact with a distributed data processing system that can handle the complexities of big data. The SMART system improves the user experience by carefully sending additional data to the visualization system in response to a request from an analyst so that future visualization requests can be answered directly by the visualization system without accessing the data processing system . Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Detecting Early-Warning Signals of Market Share Loss from Locus of Customer Movements Z. Morley Mao, PhD, is Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, College of Engineering, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor campus. John E. Marcotte, PhD is a statistician and data security expert. His research concerns data sharing, data security, data management, disclosure, health policy, nursing staffing and patient outcomes. He has over 25 years of experience implementing computing systems and performing quantitative analysis. During his career, Marcotte has served as a quantitative researcher, biostatistician, data archivist, data security officer and computing director. Among Marcotte’s statistical fortes are linear and logistic regression, survival analysis and sampling while his computing specialties include secure systems, high performance systems and numerical methods. He has collaborated with social and natural scientists as well as nurses and physicians. Marcotte regularly presents at professional conferences and contributes to invited panels on data security and disclosure. He has formal training in Demography, Statistics and Computer Science. Research Data Security Options Jason Mars is a professor of computer science at the University of Michigan where he directs Clarity Lab, one of the best places in the world to be trained in A.I. and system design. Jason is also co-founder and CEO of Clinc, the cutting-edge A.I. startup that developed the world’s most advanced conversational AI. Jason has devoted his career to solving difficult real-world problems, building some of the worlds most sophisticated salable systems for A.I., computer vision, and natural language processing. Prior to University of Michigan, Jason was a professor at UCSD. He also worked at Google and Intel. Jason’s work constructing large-scale A.I. and deep learning-based systems and technology has been recognized globally and continues to have a significant impact on industry and academia. Jason holds a PhD in Computer Science from UVA. Dr. Masotti develops statistical methods for data derived from medical imaging processes. This data presents unique challenges such as spatial and temporal autocorrelation and high dimensionality. Image: Dr. Masotti developed a 3D boundary detection algorithm for discovering prostate cancer lesions non-invasively via multi-parametric MRI. This image displays the different theoretical tumor volumes in blue and the estimated boundary surface in red. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: MI-SPACE: Multiplex Imaging based Spatial Analysis for Discovery of Cellular Interactions in the Tumor Microenvironment The future of transportation lies at the intersection of two emerging trends, namely, the sharing economy and connected and automated vehicle technology. Our research group investigates the impact of these two major trends on the future of mobility, quantifying the benefits and identifying the challenges of integrating these technologies into our current systems. Our research on shared-use mobility systems focuses on peer-to-peer (P2P) ridesharing and multi-modal transportation. We provide: (i) operational tools and decision support systems for shared-use mobility in legacy as well as connected and automated transportation systems. This line of research focuses on system design as well as routing, scheduling, and pricing mechanisms to serve on-demand transportation requests; (ii) insights for regulators and policy makers on mobility benefits of multi-modal transportation; (ii) planning tools that would allow for informed regulations of sharing economy. In another line of research we investigate challenges faced by the connected automated vehicle technology before mass adoption of this technology can occur. Our research mainly focuses on (i) transition of control authority between the human driver and the autonomous entity in semi-autonomous (level 3 SAE autonomy) vehicles; (ii) incorporating network-level information supplied by connected vehicle technology into traditional trajectory planning; (iii) improving vehicle localization by taking advantage of opportunities provided by connected vehicles; and (iv) cybersecurity challenges in connected and automated systems. We seek to quantify the mobility and safety implications of this disruptive technology, and provide insights that can allow for informed regulations. My research focuses on ways to reduce the environmental impact, cost, and inefficiency of electric power systems via new operational and control strategies. I am particularly interested in developing new methods to actively engage distributed flexible resources such as energy storage, electric loads, and distributed renewable resources in power system operation. This is especially important in power systems with high penetrations of intermittent renewable energy resources such as wind and solar. In my work, I use methods from a variety of fields including control systems and optimization. I also use engineering methods to inform energy policy. I use genetics algorithms and data mining to assist with the task of refactoring large software products to improve the quality their quality. Software Engineering and Game Design My research interests are focused improving how we care for our patients by developing analytics tools that automate providing quantitative and statistical measures to augment qualitative and anecdotal evaluation. This requires technical efforts, to create databases and software, and clinical efforts, to integrate data aggregation, analysis and use into routine processes. Construction of knowledge based clinical practice improvement databases and standardizations in nomenclatures and ontologies needed to automate aggregation for all patients in a practice and enable data exchanges within and among institutions are facets of this work. A recent example includes, design implementation and use of an electronic prescription database to improve per patient treatment plan evaluation and enable longitudinal monitoring of results of practice quality improvement efforts. We are also leading a group, sponsored by our professional societies, to define national standards for naming used in data exchanges for clinical trials. Another facet is improvement of patient treatment plan evaluation. Traditionally qualitative, visual inspection of spatial dose relationships to target and normal tissues is used to evaluate plans. Development of algorithms to calculate vectorized dose volume histograms and other vector based spatial-dose objects provide a means to quantify those evaluations. Recently use of databases of dose information have enabled construction of statistical metrics to improve treatment plan evaluation and development of models for quantifying relationships to outcomes. Data science applications : data driven clinical practice improvement, multi-institutional analysis of factors affecting patient outcomes and practice characterization, nomenclature and ontology . My interests are in the areas of labor economics, program evaluation, and the economics of education. Currently my research focuses on college student debt accumulation and the subsequent risk of default, the effect of tuition subsidies on college attendance, the influence of family wealth on college attendance and completion, the effect of financial aid packages on college attendance, completion and subsequent labor market earnings, the influence of education on job displacement and subsequent earnings, the impact of unemployment insurance rules on unemployment durations and re-employment wages, and the determinants and consequences of repeat use of the unemployment insurance system. Jeffrey S. McCullough, PhD, is Associate Professor in the department of Health Management and Policy in the School of Public Health at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. McCullough’s research focuses on technology and innovation in health care with an emphasis on information technology (IT), pharmaceuticals, and empirical methods.  Many of his studies explored the effect of electronic health record (EHR) systems on health care quality and productivity. While the short-run gains from health IT adoption may be modest, these technologies form the foundation for a health information infrastructure. As scientists are just beginning to understand how to harness and apply medical information, this problem is complicated by the sheer complexity of medical care, the heterogeneity across patients, and the importance of treatment selection. His current work draws on methods from both machine learning and econometrics to address these issues. Current pharmaceutical studies examine the roles of consumer heterogeneity and learning about the value of products as well as the effect of direct-to-consumer advertising on health. The marginal effects of health IT on mortality by diagnosis and deciles of severity. We study the affect of hospitals’ electronic health record (EHR) systems on patient outcomes. While we observe no benefits for the average patient, mortality falls significantly for high-risk patients in all EHR-sensitive conditions. These patterns, combined findings from other analyses, suggest that EHR systems may be more effective at supporting care coordination and information management than at rules-based clinical decision support. McCullough, Parente, and Town, “Health information technology and patient outcomes: the role of information and labor coordination.” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 47, no. 1 (Spring 2016). I am a data scientist, with extensive and various experience drawing inference from large data sets. In education research, I work to understand and improve postsecondary student outcomes using the rich, extensive, and complex digital data produced in the course of educating students in the 21st century. In 2011, we launched the E2Coach computer tailored support system, and in 2014, we began the REBUILD project, a college-wide effort to increase the use of evidence-based methods in introductory STEM courses. In 2015, we launched the Digital Innovation Greenhouse, an education technology accelerator within the UM Office of Digital Education and Innovation. In astrophysics, my main research tools have been the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, the Dark Energy Survey, and the simulations which support them both. We use these tools to probe the growth and nature of cosmic structure as well as the expansion history of the Universe, especially through studies of galaxy clusters. I have also studied astrophysical transients as part of the Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment. This image, drawn from a network analysis of 127,653,500 connections among 57,752 students, shows the relative degrees of connection for students in the 19 schools and colleges which constitute the University of Michigan. It provides a 30,000 foot overview of the connection and isolation of various groups of students at Michigan. (Drawn from the senior thesis work of UM Computer Science major Kar Epker) My research interests lie in the application of mathematical tools to machine learning models, e.g., using tools from graph theory and stochastic processes to study graphical neural networks, and conversely, the application of artificial intelligence to mathematical proofs, e.g., automated theorem-proving and theorem-generation. With IDEAS, I also work to use more standard applications of machine learning models to solve problems for groups who traditionally lack access to data science expertise. My doctoral training was in algebraic number theory, and one of the boasts of number theory is that you are required to use tools from every discipline in mathematics to understand all of its facets. This brought me in contact with graph theory both in the abstract and in the applied setting of Markov chains and stochastic processes, and using these ideas to model evolutions of systems in natural settings. Most recently, the dynamic updating of stochastic processes on graphs is very similar in spirit to the training of many models of neural networks, and exploring the symbiosis between these two sets of ideas has been a driver of my recent research. In IDEAS, we are excited about taking the reams of student and faculty expertise and research at the University of Michigan and using it “for the people” — finding ways of furthering the goals of small businesses or local community groups that do not have the resources to have a data scientist on staff. On the research front, I personally am very excited to see how the study of mathematics evolves as generative AI models meet formal theorem-proving systems. Our research aims to address some of the world’s biggest challenges through chemical recycling of waste plastics, developing methods to capture microplastics, measuring microplastics in the environment, and designing redox-active molecules for energy storage applications. Accomplishments and Awards Michigan Minds podcast: Dealing with plastic that can’t be recycled My primary project, election forensics, concerns using statistical analysis to try to determine whether election results are accurate. Election forensics methods use data about voters and votes that are as highly disaggregated as possible. Typically this means polling station (precinct) data, sometimes ballot box data. Data can comprises hundreds of thousands or millions of observations. Geographic information is used, with geographic structure being relevant. Estimation involves complex statistical models. Frontiers include: distinguishing frauds from effects of strategic behavior; estimating frauds probabilities for individual observations (e.g., polling stations); adjoining nonvoting data such as from in-person election observations. I have a broad interest in real world problems related to text information management. My research focuses on information retrieval and text mining, with applications in web, social media, scientific literature, bioinformatics, and health informatics. I also have a strong interest in machine learning, data mining, natural language processing, and social network analysis. To know more about my research, please see my personal site. Accomplishments and Awards ChatGPT acts more altruistically, cooperatively than humans | University of Michigan News My group’s research focuses on understanding and modeling the interconnections between human experience and the built environment. We design autonomous systems that support wellbeing, safety and productivity of office and construction workers, and provides them opportunities for lifelong learning and upskilling. In all research projects, we work hard to ensure that the results are inclusive and benefit people of different abilities in their daily activities and empower them for nontraditional careers. Dr. Niccolò Meneghetti is an Assistant Professor of Computer and Information Science at the University of Michigan-Dearborn. His major research interests are in the broad area of database systems, with primary focus on probabilistic databases, statistical relational learning and uncertain data management. Dr. Mezuk is the Director of the Center for Social Epidemiology and Population Health and is an Associate Chair in the Department of Epidemiology at the University of Michigan School of Public Health. She is a psychiatric epidemiologist whose research focuses on understanding the intersections of mental and physical health. Much of her work has examined the consequences of depression for medical morbidity and functioning in mid- and late-life, with particular attention to metabolic diseases such as diabetes and frailty. She is also the Director of the Michigan Integrative Well-Being and Inequalities (MIWI) Training Program, a NIH-funded methods training program that supports innovative, interdisciplinary research on the interrelationships between mental and physical health as they relate to health disparities. She is using data science tools to analyze textual data from the National Violent Death Reporting System, with the goal of better understanding how major life transitions relate to suicide risk over the lifespan. She is committed to translating research into practice, and she writes a blog for Psychology Today called “Ask an Epidemiologist.” Eric Michielssen, PhD, is Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Director of the Michigan Institute for Computational Discovery and Engineering, and Associate Vice President for Advanced Research Computing. His research interests include all aspects of theoretical, applied, and computational electromagnetics, with emphasis on the development of fast (primarily) integral-equation-based techniques for analyzing electromagnetic phenomena. His group studies fast multipole methods for analyzing static and high frequency electronic and optical devices, fast direct solvers for scattering analysis, and butterfly algorithms for compressing matrices that arise in the integral equation solution of large-scale electromagnetic problems. Furthermore, the group works on plane-wave-time-domain algorithms that extend fast multipole concepts to the time domain, and develop time-domain versions of pre-corrected FFT/adaptive integral methods.  Collectively, these algorithms allow the integral equation analysis of time-harmonic and transient electromagnetic phenomena in large-scale linear and nonlinear surface scatterers, antennas, and circuits.  Recently, the group developed powerful Calderon multiplicative preconditioners for accelerating time domain integral equation solvers applied to the analysis of multiscale phenomena, and used the above analysis techniques to develop new closed-loop and multi-objective optimization tools for synthesizing electromagnetic devices, as well as to assist in uncertainty quantification studies relating to electromagnetic compatibility and bioelectromagnetic problems. The Language and Information Technologies (LIT) lab, directed by Rada Mihalcea, conducts research in natural language processing, information retrieval, and applied machine learning. The group specifically focuses on projects concerned with text semantics (word/text similarity, large semantic networks), behavior analysis (multilingual opinion analysis, multimodal models for deception detection, emotion recognition, alertness detection, stress/anxiety detection, analysis of counseling speech), big data for cross-cultural analysis (geotagging, understanding cross-cultural differences and worldview), educational applications (pedagogical search engines, automatic short answer grading, conversational technologies for student advising). Several of the projects in the LIT lab are interdisciplinary, acknowledging the fact that language can be used to deepen our understanding in many different fields, such as psychology, sociology, history, and others. Some of the ongoing projects in the lab are collaborations with psychologists and sociologists, and target a rich modeling of human behavior through language analysis, seeking answers to questions such as “what are the core values of a culture?”  and “are there differences in how different groups of people perceive the surrounding world?” The lab is also actively working on multimodal projects to track and understand human behavior, where language analysis is complemented with other channels such as facial expressions, gestures, and physiological signals. Of interest, Prof. Mihalcea was quoted in a story about sexism and today’s virtual assistants such as Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s Siri, and Microsoft’s Cortana ; Refinery29 . The LIT lab conducts research that brings together techniques for natural language understanding, multimodal processing, and social media analysis. Biases in large image-text AI model favor wealthier, Western perspectives Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Developing Language-based Tools For Real-Time Counseling Feedback Professor Christopher Miller is an observational cosmologist who works in the fields of astronomical data mining and computational astrostatistics. He co-founded the INternational Computational Astrostatistics (INCA) group, a collaboration of researchers from the University of Michigan, Carnegie Mellon University, University of Washington, Georgia Tech, the NOAO, and others. Recently, he led the NOAO Science Data Management group, where he was responsible for using and delivering science quality astronomical data from instruments like the MOSAIC optical and NEWFIRM IR images on NOAO’s 4m-class telescopes. He was hired at the University of Michigan under a U-M Presidential initiative for advancing data mining research. His research and teaching emphasizes open source collaborative code development and the use of cloud computing to analyze large volumes of astronomical data. Professor Miller’s group develops and applies advanced computational and statistical techniques to address the following research areas: Cosmological parameter inference using the abundance and spatial distribution of clusters of galaxies. Evolution of the physical properties of the brightest galaxy cluster members. Morphological classification of galaxies. Dynamical techniques to trace the gravitational potential of galaxy clusters and probe the theory of gravity over large scales. Advanced data reduction pipelines for multi-object spectroscopic data. Concurrent real-world and simulated data analysis Left: Three galaxies –an elliptical and an armless disk galaxy (or S0) (top); the same spiral galaxy as seen through a “low-resolution” ground-based telescope (bottom-left) versus the “high resolution” space-based Hubble telescope (bottom-right). Right: We measure the 1D elliptically projected light profile with three parameters: size, ellipticity, and power-law of the intensity. We then apply machine learning to classify the morphologies for ellipticals, spirals, and S0 disk galaxies. The parameters alone can separate spirals from ellipticals even in poorly resolved images. We have developed new machine learning algorithms to clean “gold standard” training sets which suffer from instrumental defects. Image: Chris Miller U-M Astronomy, Guillermo Cabrera Center for Mathematical Modeling, Univ de. Chile Greg’s research primarily investigates information flow in financial markets and the actions of agents in those markets – both consumers and producers of that information. His approach draws on theory from the social sciences (economics, psychology and sociology) combined with large data sets from diverse sources and a variety of data science approaches. Most projects combine data from across multiple sources, including commercial data bases, experimentally created data and extracting data from sources designed for other uses (commercial media, web scrapping, cellphone data etc.). In addition to a wide range of econometric and statistical methods, his work has included applying machine learning , textual analysis, mining social media, processes for missing data and combining mixed media. A.J is a  Research Investigator at ICPSR who also studies topics like public-sector information technology use, scholarly communication, research data management, and public administration. His work can be found on Google Scholar . Sarah Mills’ research looks at how renewable energy development impacts rural communities (positively and negatively), the disparate reactions of rural landowners to wind and solar projects, and how state and local policies facilitate or hinder renewable energy deployment. Through a grant from the Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy, she also helps communities in incorporating clean energy in their planning and zoning. With respect to data science, in addition to conducting social science surveys, Sarah has also developed a unique database–energyzoning.org–which includes local government zoning regulations from six states across the Midwest. Accomplishments and Awards Across America, clean energy plants are being banned faster than they’re being built Brian Min, PhD, is Associate Professor of Political Science in the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Min holds secondary appointments as Research Associate Professor in the Center for Political Studies and the Institute for Social Research. Prof. Min studies the political economy of development with an emphasis on distributive politics, public goods provision, and energy politics. His research uses high-resolution satellite imagery to study the distribution of electricity across and within the developing world. He has collaborated closely with the World Bank using satellite technologies and statistical algorithms to monitor electricity access in India and Africa, including the creation of a web platform to visualize twenty years of change in light output for every village in India (http://nightlights.io). At the Min Lab, we aim to advance the next generation of engineering tools that enable innovative product designs for precision medicine. We integrate core concepts in chemical engineering, biological sciences, and AI/data science, to arrive at innovative engineering solutions to significant health problems. We focus on developing sophisticated nanomaterials-based platform technologies that enable the rational use of available and/or experimental therapies. Our long-term goal is to utilize these new tools to understand the make-up of diseases and the changes associated with disease progression and therapy. By enabling robust analyses of pharmacodynamic markers, they will also have potential to enable development of new, clinically meaningful biomarkers that can be used to advance drug development. Dr. Minoccheri’s research interests focus on using mathematical tools to enhance existing machine learning methods and develop novel ones. A central topic is the use of tensor methods, multilinear algebra, and invariant theory to leverage higher order structural properties in data mining, classification, and deep learning. Other research interests include interpretable machine learning and transparent models. The main applications are in the computational medicine domain, such as phenotyping, medical image segmentation, drug design, patients’ prognosis. Transportation is the backbone of the urban mobility system and is one of the greatest sources of environmental emissions and pollutions. Making urban transportation efficient, equitable and sustainable is the main focus of my research. My students and I analyze small scale survey data as well as large scale spatiotemporal data to identify travel behavior trends and patterns at a disaggregate level using econometric methods, which we then scale up to the population level through predictive and statistical modeling. We also design our own data collection methods and instruments, be it a network of smart devices or stated preference experiments. Our expertise lies in identifying latent constructs that influence decisions and choices, which in turn dictate demands on the systems and subsystems. We use our expertise to design incentives and policy suggestions that can help promote sustainable and equitable multimodal transportation systems. Our team also uses data analytics, particularly classification and pattern recognition algorithms, to analyze crash context data and develop safety-critical scenarios for automated and connected vehicle (CAV) deployment. We have developed an online game based on such scenarios to promote safe shared mobility among teenagers and young adults and plan to expand research in that area. We are also currently expanding our research to explore the use of NN in context information synthesis. This is a project where we used classification and Bayesian models to identify scenarios that are risky for pedestrians and bicyclists. We then developed an online game based on those scenarios for middle schoolers so that they are better prepared for shared road conflicts. Dr. Mitchell’s research focuses on the causes and consequences of family formation behavior. He examines how social context such as neighborhood resources and values influence family processes and how those processes interplay with an individual’s genetic and epigenetic makeup to influence behavior, wellbeing, and health. His research also includes the development of new methods for integrating the collection and analysis of biological and social data. I am the PI of NASA's Geospace Dynamics Constellation (GDC) Mission's NEMISIS magnetometer. GDC consists of six spacecraft to measure the energy flow from the magnetosphere to the ionosphere. This energy creates structure in the upper atmosphere that can disrupt communication and navigation signals, damage power grids, and decrease satellite lifetimes. My goal is to have a magnetometer on every vehicle in the universe to be able to understand energy flow through the entire space system. My research involves discovery, modeling, and design for comparative biomechanics and bio-inspired robotics. I develop new information-based methods to analyze the behavior and locomotion of animals in natural environments and use laboratory-based experiments to build detailed models of how animal motion is generated by muscles, tendons, and bones. I’ve developed machine learning methods to automatically segment non-standard animals in photographs for taxonomically-broad phylogenetic comparative analyses of color pattern and behavior. I also use Finite Element Analysis to understand how the evolution of 3-dimensional shape in animal bones and teeth have adapted to a variety of ecological situations, such as novel substrates or diet. Because FEA and other biomechanical methods are so computationally intensive, I’ve adopted a surrogate model approach that uses Bayesian Optimization to perform stimulus selection and make accurate predictions of sample performance with the minimum number of model datapoints. I’ve also begun applying this surrogate model approach to explore the design space of bio-inspired grippers made from dielectric fluid actuators. Data-driven modeling also informs the design rigid legged robots in my lab, which we will use to test hypotheses regarding how limb shape affects overall locomotion. Additional Information What are some of your most interesting projects? Jerboas are bipedal desert rodents that hop erratically with zig-zag trajectories when they are escaping from predators (some describe them as “ricochetal”). These animals are about the size of your fist, but they can jump over 3 feet straight up in the air or forwards. Little was known about their locomotion, and the majority of biomechanical locomotion research was performed in lab environments on treadmills. However, training an animal to run on a treadmill reduces the variability in direction and speed that the animals would need to survive in the wild. So I went out into the desert and filmed these animals jumping and running on their natural substrates. To understand how these trajectories might confound predators, I measured the unpredictability (or entropy) and found that bipedal desert rodents are much less predictable than quadrupedal desert rodents. Then, taking a closer look using high-speed video cameras, I determined that they have at least 5 distinct bipedal gaits. Using both kinematic and dynamic data, I built a modified Spring-Loaded Inverted Pendulum model with a torsional spring to control the neutral leg swing angle. I then performed a numerical search using a continuing approach to test neighboring parameter values for viability to discover bifurcations in gait structure. I found that by decoupling the neutral leg swing angle between left and right legs, the model was capable of transitioning between gaits across the entire speed range, just as the real jerboas do. This research will be used to inform the design of controllers for legged robots to switch gaits smoothly across a wide range of speeds. How did you end up where you are today? I started off not knowing at all what I wanted to do, but enjoying martial arts. A friend told me to check out the biomechanics class in my last year in undergrad at UC Berkeley, and I was hooked! I joined the lab immediately and worked there for two years after graduating. I wanted to learn everything, so I worked on a different project with a different graduate student every day of the week. During that time, I worked with cockroaches, geckos, iguanas, and agama lizards, learning about how they generate and control their motions. I was also lucky to get hands-on experience with designing and building bio-inspired robots and using them to test biological hypotheses to reveal fundamental principles of animal locomotion. After that, I went on to study biomechanics and evolutionary biology at Harvard, where I was introduced to jerboas for the first time. They are such strange and wonderful creatures that I knew I wanted to study them for the rest of my life. I came to UM in 2015 and worked as a postdoc in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, where I developed a new modular ethogram system to analyze snake anti-predator behaviors and design snake-mimicking soft robots. Then I became a Research Scientist in the Robotics Institute, followed by being hired as an Assistant Professor in Mechanical Engineering in January of 2021. Now I am appointed in both Robotics and Mechanical Engineering and have affiliations with Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and the Museum of Zoology. What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? I really want to build tools to bridge the gap between biology and engineering. So many biological questions are constrained by the technology we have available. By forming connections between these fields, I have already facilitated more quantitative study of non-steady-state locomotion in natural environments. There is also a big gap between what motions animals and robots are capable of performing. I hope to learn strategies from animals and design robots to succeed in unstructured and complex environments. What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? I’m extremely excited that data science is making it possible to analyze the types of large datasets that we can collect from animals. There is no limit to the amount of data you can collect about animal locomotion, behavior, appearance, or structure, and the types of studies that used to take decades can now be done in a semester thanks to data science and AI. This makes it possible to integrate information from multiple different data streams and understand more complex relationships between animals, their environments, and how these relationships change through space and time. What are 1-3 interesting facts about yourself? I’ve done fieldwork in Malaysia, China, Australia, California, the Bahamas and Peru. I think it’s incredibly important to examine animals in their natural habitats, because our assumptions about their behaviors might be totally wrong if we only see them in zoos or labs. The first sentence I try to learn in every language is “Where is the bathroom?” My two rules for fieldwork are: 1) Never stop moving and 2) Never sit down or lean on anything. Jeffrey D. Morenoff is a professor of sociology, a research professor at the Institute for Social Research (ISR), and a professor of public policy at the Ford School. He is also director of the ISR Population Studies Center. Professor Morenoff’s research interests include neighborhood environments, inequality, crime and criminal justice, the social determinants of health, racial/ethnic/immigrant disparities in health and antisocial behavior, and methods for analyzing multilevel and spatial data. Research in the CHAI lab focuses on emotion modeling (classification and perception) and assistive technology (bipolar disorder and aphasia). Behavioral Signal Processing Approach to Modeling Human-centered Data Building data-intensive systems that are more scalable, more robust, and more predictable. He draws from advanced statistical models to deliver practical database solutions to real-world problems. In particular, he adapts concepts and tools from applied statistics, optimization theory, and machine learning. Dr. Yi Lu Murphey is an Associate Dean for Graduate Education and Research, a Professor of the ECE(Electrical and Computer Engineering) department and the director of the Intelligent Systems Lab at the University of Michigan, Dearborn. She received a M.S. degree in computer science from Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, in 1983, and a Ph.D degree with a major in Computer Engineering and a minor in Control Engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, in 1989. Her current research interests are in the areas of machine learning, pattern recognition, computer vision and intelligent systems with applications to automated and connected vehicles, optimal vehicle power management, data analytics, and robotic vision systems. She has authored over 130 publications in refereed journals and conference proceedings. She is an editor for the Journal of Pattern Recognition, a senior life member of AAAI and a fellow of IEEE. Raj Nadakuditi, PhD, is Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, College of Engineering, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Nadakuditi received his Masters and PhD in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at MIT as part of the MIT/WHOI Joint Program in Ocean Science and Engineering. His work is at the interface of statistical signal processing and random matrix theory with applications such as sonar, radar, wireless communications and machine learning in mind. Prof. Nadakuditi particularly enjoys using random matrix theory to address problems that arise in statistical signal processing. An important component of his work is applying it in real-world settings to tease out low-level signals from sensor, oceanographic, financial and econometric time/frequency measurements/time series. In addition to the satisfaction derived from transforming the theory into practice, real-world settings give us insight into how the underlying techniques can be refined and/or made more robust. Accomplishments and Awards A coaching bot for students learning coding, computational Machine Learning, and AI University of Michigan is Developing an AI Coaching Bot For Students My research is on the design of efficient (approximation) algorithms for combinatorial optimization problems. I work on deterministic optimization models, as well as richer models that handle uncertainty in data: stochastic, robust and online optimization. I am also interested in algorithms for scheduling and energy-efficiency in data centers. Our lab is focused on answering the question-What is the role of tumor microenvironment in modulating cancer cell metabolism? We have developed several metabolic isotope tracing and 13C-based metabolic flux analysis developed in our lab. cells. Notably, we are focusing on personalized metabolic therapy and circulating tumor cell organoids and tumor tissue slices in pancreatic, lung, and breast cancers. We integrate high dimensional imaging, tissue engineering, metabolic engineering, bioinformatics, machine learning, and systems biology tools developed in our labs to understand metabolic interactions between cancer and stromal cells. Using our recently developed platform, collateral lethal identification of metabolic targets (CLIM)-a machine learning and genome-scale metabolic flux analysis-based framework, we elucidate the broad efficacy of targeting MTHFD2 despite distinct cancer genetic profiles co-occurring with UQCR11 deletion and irrespective of stromal compositions of tumors.” Our CLIM method can be used to identify metabolic vulnerabilities in other cancers and could serve as a precision treatment plans for a host of malignancies. Inbal (Billie) Nahum-Shani is a Research Associate Professor in the Institute for Social Research, and a founding member of the Data-science for Dynamic Decision-making lab (d3lab) at the University of Michigan. Her research focuses on conceptual and methodological issues pertaining to the construction of effective Adaptive Interventions — a treatment design in which ongoing information from the person is used to individualize the type/dose/modality of support (or treatment); and Just-In-Time Adaptive Interventions (JITAIs) — a special form of adaptive interventions in which mobile devices are used to provide support in a timely and ecological manner. The focus of Dr. Najarian’s research is on the design of signal/image processing and machine learning methods to create computer-assisted clinical decision support systems that improve patient care and reduce the costs of healthcare. Dr. Najarian’s lab also designs sensors to collect and analyze physiological signals and images. In particular, Dr. Najarian’s research focuses on creating decision support systems to manage traumatic brain injuries, traumatic pelvic/abdominal injuries and hypovolemia. Dr. Najarian’s research has been funded by agencies such as National Science Foundation and Department of Defense. He serves as the Editor-in-Chief of Biomedical Engineering and Computational Biology and the Associate Editor of two other journals in the field of biomedical informatics. He is also a member of the editorial board of many other journals and serves as the guest editor of special issues for several journals. I study quality of care and patient outcomes in healthcare delivery systems, largely focusing on cardiovascular diseases. I use large national and regional data sets to answer fundamental questions about current healthcare delivery systems and how new approaches to designing these systems could save lives and reduce disease burden in large patient populations. My research includes the use of innovative data mining and machine learning tools. As Director of the Michigan Integrated Center for Health Analytics and Medical Prediction (MiCHAMP), I collaborate with multidisciplinary investigators on predictive modeling and precision medicine initiatives. http://michamp.med.umich.edu/; http://midas.umich.edu/research/health/mchamp/ I have received funding from AHRQ, NIH, VA HSR&D and the BCBS Foundation of Michigan and participated on NIH and VA study sections targeting health services research. I am Editor-in-Chief of Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality & Outcomes, a leading cardiovascular outcomes research journal published by the American Heart Association. Our team develops machine learning algorithms for the enhancement of outcomes in cataract surgery, the most commonly performed surgery in the world. Our work focuses on developing models for postoperative refraction after cataract surgery and analysis of surgical quality. Dr. Nalliah’s research expertise is process evaluation. He has studied various healthcare processes, educational processes and healthcare economics. Dr. Nalliah’s research studies were the first time nationwide data was used to highlight emergency room resource utilization for managing dental conditions in the United States. Dr. Nalliah is internationally recognized as a pioneer in the field of nationwide hospital dataset research for dental conditions and has numerous publications in peer reviewed journals. After completing a masters degree at Harvard School of Public Health, Dr. Nalliah’s interests have expanded and he has studied various public health issues including sports injuries, poisoning, child abuse, motor vehicle accidents and surgical processes (like stem cell transplants, cardiac valve surgery and fracture reduction). National recognition of his expertise in these broader topics of medicine have given rise to opportunities to lecture to medical residents, nurse practitioners, students in medical, pharmacy and nursing programs about oral health. This is his passion- that his research should inform an evolution of health education curriculum and practice. Dr. Nalliah’s professional mission is to improve healthcare delivery systems and he is interested in improving processes, minimizing inefficiencies, reducing healthcare bottlenecks, increasing quality, and increase task sharing which will lead to a patient-centered, coherent healthcare system. Dr. Nalliah’s research has identified systems constraints and his goal is to influence policy and planning to break those constraints and improve healthcare delivery. Satish Narayanasamy, Ph.D., is Associate Professor in the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science department in the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Satish’s interests are working at the intersection of computer architecture, software systems and program analysis. His current interests include concurrency, security, customized architectures and tools for mobile and web applications, machine learning assisted program analysis, and tools for teaching at scale. Accomplishments and Awards 22 Indian-origin scientists to take up collaborative research with institutes in country I work in the area of urban sustainability, with research questions at multiple scales and environmental and socio-economic systems. My work uses spatial analysis (esp. GIS and remote sensing) and mass-balance accounting (life cycle assessment, material flow analysis). My lab is starting to use big data from a range of sources (Zillow, Twitter, etc) and I am interested in collaborating with data sciences of various stripes on sustainability and equity challenges. Accomplishments and Awards Nearly 15% of Americans Deny Climate Change, Study Finds 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Using Geospatial Data Science to Identify Vulnerable Communities to Climate Change Urban-grown food’s carbon footprint 6 times larger than typical produce Study examines carbon footprint of urban-farmed food I am broadly interested in statistical inference, which is informally defined as the process of turning data into prediction and understanding. I like to work with richly structured data, such as those extracted from texts, images and other spatiotemporal signals. In recent years I have gravitated toward a field in statistics known as Bayesian nonparametrics, which provides a fertile and powerful mathematical framework for the development of many computational and statistical modeling ideas. My motivation for all this came originally from an early interest in machine learning, which continues to be a major source of research interest. A primary focus of my group’s research in machine learning to develop more effective inference algorithms using stochastic, variational and geometric viewpoints. I try to understand how our tools for determining what is valuable, worthwhile, or good are implicated in patterns of inequality with an acute concern for racial inequality. Often, this means my work investigates the functioning and consequences of a range of scores or ratings, from the less complex government credit ratings to the extremely complex algorithmic scores like consumer credit scores. In related work, as a part of a multi-university team of researchers, I am using administrative credit report data from one of the largest credit reporting agencies to study credit and debt outcomes for millions of consumers in the United States. My research focuses on building infrastructure for public health and health science research organizations to take advantage of cloud computing, strong software engineering practices, and MLOps (machine learning operations). By equipping biomedical research groups with tools that facilitate automation, better documentation, and portable code, we can improve the reproducibility and rigor of science while scaling up the kind of data collection and analysis possible. Research topics include: 1. Open source software and cloud infrastructure for research, 2. Software development practices and conventions that work for academic units, like labs or research centers, and 3. The organizational factors that encourage best practices in reproducibility, data management, and transparency The practice of science is a tug of war between competing incentives: the drive to do a lot fast, and the need to generate reproducible work. As data grows in size, code increases in complexity and the number of collaborators and institutions involved goes up, it becomes harder to preserve all the “artifacts” needed to understand and recreate your own work. Technical AND cultural solutions will be needed to keep data-centric research rigorous, shareable, and transparent to the broader scientific community. View MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch, Fall 2021 My research interests include health effects of air pollution, temperature extremes and climate change (mortality, asthma, hospital admissions, birth outcomes and cardiovascular endpoints); environmental exposure assessment; and socio-economic influences on health. Data science tools and methodologies include geographic information systems and spatio-temporal analysis, epidemiologic study design and data management. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Using Geospatial Data Science to Identify Vulnerable Communities to Climate Change Sally Oey’s group is studying massive star populations and the escape of ionizing radiation from starburst galaxies and super star clusters. The group is at the forefront of establishing a new paradigm for massive-star feedback, where superwinds from compact young star clusters fail to launch. Members have used numerical simulations and image processing techniques to investigate such conditions for allowing ionizing radiation to penetrate the dense gas in star-forming clouds and the interstellar medium in “green pea” galaxies and resolved nearby starbursts. The ionizing radiation may originate from massive binaries and their products, thus group members are carrying out data mining of observational surveys and binary population synthesis models to study how binarity manifests in stellar populations. I lead the Future of Programming Lab (FP Lab), where we design modern user interfaces for modern programming languages. Much of how we program today is rooted in tools designed 40+ years ago, e.g. how we enter code (using simple text editing, which leads to profligate parse errors), how we validate code (using tests or impoverished type systems), how we explore code (in a slow, batched, textual manner), how we communicate change (by throwing away the edits we performed and forcing diff algorithms to guess what we did), and so on. My lab develops new programming language and editor mechanisms, starting from theoretical foundations in mathematics and building up to human interfaces. Integrating live GUIs into programs with holes My research explores the interplay between corporate decisions and employee actions. I currently use anonymized mobile device data to observe individual behaviors, and employ both unsupervised and supervised machine learning techniques. My research focuses on understanding and quantifying climate change impacts on hydroclimatic extremes. From heavy storms and floods to extreme heatwaves and droughts, I study the changing characteristics of these events and their impacts on our daily lives. I use a wide range of data-driven methods such as causal inference, information theory, nonlinear dynamics and machine learning in the analysis of environmental systems. I am primarily interested in using causal inference to obtain new mechanistic insights on the impact of global warming on extreme weather events. My recent work has explored global warming impact on extreme events such as rainfall extremes, using a combination of observations and model simulations. Additionally, recent work has focused on developing new techniques to measure resilience of environmental systems to extreme events, with the ultimate goal of informing mitigation and adaptation strategies to climate change. Map of the Northern Hemisphere showing the projected increase in extreme daily rainfall by 2100 relative to 1950–1979 (the risk ratio). Darker areas are predicted to be more prone to increased rainfall extremes with global warming. What are some of your most interesting projects? Resilience of Watersheds to Extreme Weather and Climate Events: Hydrologic watersheds are the fundamental units of the land surface used in the analysis and management of water resources systems. The response of watersheds to extreme events is highly complex and determined by a multitude of factors, including the presence of dams and reservoirs, snowpack, groundwater-surface water interaction, and vegetation cover, among others. One significant knowledge gap in this field of research is how to objectively and unambiguously quantify the resilience and resistance of watersheds to extreme events, such as droughts and floods. Developing metrics to quantify resilience is of utmost importance, particularly in light of the changing characteristics of extreme events due to global warming. In this project, I employ a wide range of statistical methods to quantify resilience. I then apply methods of machine learning, causal inference, and graph-based techniques to explore patterns of resilience across watersheds worldwide. How did you end up where you are today? I originally hail from Sudan, nestled at the heart of Africa. Growing up along the banks of the Nile River, I developed an early fascination with water and its profound connection to humanity. On one hand, it provides people with their needs for drinking, agriculture, transportation, and recreation. On the other hand, an excess or shortage of water often results in devastating natural disasters, such as floods, droughts, and famines. Throughout antiquity, humans have endeavored to regulate rivers by building dams, canals, and various other structures. This deep-seated interest in water sciences and related engineering disciplines led me to pursue a degree in Civil Engineering. Following my college graduation, I chose to embark on graduate studies to delve deeper into the intricate relationship between climate change and the water cycle. Embarking on an arduous 18-hour flight, I traversed the vast Atlantic Ocean and the continental expanse of the United States to arrive in California, the Golden State. There, I successfully completed my MSc and PhD degrees at the University of California, Irvine, in just under five years. Subsequently, I relocated northward to Berkeley, where I conducted my postdoctoral research, focusing on the impact of global warming on climate extreme events. I come to University of Michigan with a deep research interest in exploring the impact of global warming on extreme events and the resilience of ecosystems to such events. My research group harness recent advances in data science (machine learning, causal inference and information theory) to obtain new mechanistic and predictive insights on these questions with the ultimate goal of informing climate change adaptation strategies. Gilbert Omenn, MD, PhD, is Professor of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics with appointments in Human Genetics, Molecular Medicine & Genetics in the Medical School and Professor of Public Health in the School of Public Health and the Harold T. Shapiro Distinguished University Professor at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Doctor Omenn’s current research interests are focused on cancer proteomics, splice isoforms as potential biomarkers and therapeutic tar- gets, and isoform-level and single-cell functional networks of transcripts and proteins. He chairs the global Human Proteome Project of the Human Proteome Organization. Gabor Orosz is an Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering and Civil and Environmental Engineering. His theoretical research include dynamical systems, control, and reinforcement learning with particular interests in the roles of nonlinearities and time delays in such systems. In terms of applications he focuses on connected and automated vehicles, traffic flow, and biological networks. His research has been supported by the National Science Foundation and industrial funds. His recent work appeared in journals like IEEE Transactions on Automated Control, IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, and Transportation Research Part C. For the latter journal he has also be serving as an Editor. WIRED magazine reported on his experimental results when his team built a connected automated vehicle and evaluated it in real traffic. He served as the program chair for the 12th IFAC Workshop on Time Delay Systems and served as the general chair for 3rd IAVSD Workshop on Dynamics of Road Vehicles, Connected and Automated Vehicles. Accomplishments and Awards Three faculty members, 27 students awarded Fulbrights Luis Ortiz, PhD, is Assistant Professor of Computer and Information Science, College of Engineering and Computer Science, The University of Michigan, Dearborn The study of large complex systems of structured strategic interaction, such as economic, social, biological, financial, or large computer networks, provides substantial opportunities for fundamental computational and scientific contributions. Luis’ research focuses on problems emerging from the study of systems involving the interaction of a large number of “entities,” which is my way of abstractly and generally capturing individuals, institutions, corporations, biological organisms, or even the individual chemical components of which they are made (e.g., proteins and DNA). Current technology has facilitated the collection and public availability of vasts amounts of data, particularly capturing system behavior at fine levels of granularity. In Luis’ group, they study behavioral data of strategic nature at big data levels. One of their main objectives is to develop computational tools for data science, and in particular learning large-population models from such big sources of behavioral data that we can later use to study, analyze, predict and alter future system behavior at a variety of scales, and thus improve the overall efficiency of real-world complex systems (e.g., the smart grid, social and political networks, independent security and defense systems, and microfinance markets, to name a few). Professor Owen-Smith conducts research on the collective dynamics of large scale networks and their implications for scientific and technological innovation and surgical care. He is the executive director of the Institution for Research on Innovation and Science (IRIS, http://iris.isr.umich.edu).  IRIS is a national consortium of research universities who share data and support infrastructure designed to support research to understand, explain, and eventually improve the public value of academic research and research training. One year snapshot of the collaboration network of a single large research university campus. Nodes are individuals employed on sponsored project grants, ties represent copayment on the same grant account in the same year. Ties are valued to reflect the number of grants in common. Node size is proportional to a simple measure of betweenness centrality and node color represents the results of a simple (walktrip) community finding algorithm. The image was created in Gephi. Accomplishments and Awards Jason Owen-Smith named AVP to lead research intelligence strategy UM, MSU, Wayne State communities could suffer if feds scale back on research funding Congress is failing to deliver on its promise of billions more in research spending, threatening America’s long-term economic competitiveness I am interested in principled approaches to machine learning with focus on data-driven decision making, deep learning foundations, and heterogeneous data. My research integrates optimization methods (specifically convex and first-order) and statistical learning theory to design efficient algorithms/architectures that address these data-science problems. Additional Information How did you end up where you are today? I obtained my PhD degree from Caltech in 2015 where I received a Charles Wilts Prize for the best departmental thesis. During postdoc, I was at UC Berkeley as a Simons Fellow. After spending few years in industry, I joined UC Riverside where I received NSF CAREER and Google Research Scholar Awards. Starting Fall 2023, I will be joining EECS department at U-M. An interesting fact: The elegance of mathematics has always amazed me and led me to participate in International Math Olympiad. Also, my Erdos number is 3! Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Foundations of Sequence Models for Learning, Estimation, and Control of Dynamical Systems. Necmiye Ozay, PhD, is Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, College of Engineering, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Ozay and her team develop the scientific foundations and associated algorithmic tools for compactly representing and analyzing heterogeneous data streams from sensor/information-rich networked dynamical systems. They take a unified dynamics-based and data-driven approach for the design of passive and active monitors for anomaly detection in such systems. Dynamical models naturally capture temporal (i.e., causal) relations within data streams. Moreover, one can use hybrid and networked dynamical models to capture, respectively, logical relations and interactions between different data sources. They study structural properties of networks and dynamics to understand fundamental limitations of anomaly detection from data. By recasting information extraction problem as a networked hybrid system identification problem, they bring to bear tools from computer science, system and control theory and convex optimization to efficiently and rigorously analyze and organize information. The applications include diagnostics, anomaly and change detection in critical infrastructure such as building management systems, transportation and energy networks. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Foundations of Sequence Models for Learning, Estimation, and Control of Dynamical Systems. My research examines the social media behavior of politicians. Using machine learning methods to curate lists of Twitter accounts by class, such as politicians, journalists, influencers, etc, I research temporal and topical patterns of how political communication – including campaign outreach, network alignments, hate speech, and polarization play out online before, during, and after major electoral campaigns. My work is primarily based on Twitter data, using the Twitter academic API to pull amd store tweets of accounts identified through an iterative process of shortlisting handles of interest. Thereafter, we use amix of descriptives and advanced statistical techniques to seek patterns in the data. My research is mainly concerned with theoretical and computational hydrodynamics, with applications in nonlinear ocean wave prediction and dynamics, wave-body interactions, and wave turbulence theory. I have incorporated the data science tools in my research, especially in the following two projects: 1. Quantification of statistics of extreme ship motions in irregular wave fields: In this project, we propose a new computational framework that directly resolves the statistics (and causal factors) of extreme ship responses in a nonlinear wave field. The development leverages a range of physics and learning based approaches, including nonlinear wave simulations (potential flow), ship response simulations (e.g., CFD), dimension-reduction techniques, sequential sampling, Gaussian process regression (Kriging) and multi-fidelity methods. The key features of the new approach include (i) description of the stochastic wave field by a low-dimensional probabilistic parameter space, and (ii) use of minimum number of CFD simulations to provide most information for converged statistics of extreme motions. 2. Real-time wave prediction with data assimilation from radar measurements: In this project, we develop the real-time data assimilation algorithm adapted to the CPU-GPU hardware architecture, to reduce the uncertainties associated with radar measurement errors and environmental factors such as wind and current in the realistic ocean environment. Upon integration with advanced in-situ or remote wave sensing technology, the developed computational framework can provide heretofore unavailable real-time forecast capability for ocean waves. Dimitra Panagou’s research lies in the areas of multi-agent systems and control, with applications in multi-robot/vehicle systems. She is particularly interested in establishing safety and resilience against adversity and uncertainty for multi-robot/vehicle systems using techniques from (networked) control theory, estimation theory, and machine learning. My main research interest is in quantum gravity. Various aspects of quantum information and quantum chaotic systems have proven to be essential in recent developments. 3D reconstruction and generative models. I use neural and physical 3D representations to generate realistic 3D objects and scenes. The current focus is large-scale, dynamic, and interactable 3D scene generations. These generative models will be greatly useful for content creators, like games or movies, or for autonomous agent training in virtual environments. For my research, I frequently use and adopt generative modeling techniques such as auto-decoders, GANs, or Diffusion Models. In my project “DeepSDF,” I suggested a new representation for a 3D generative model that made a breakthrough in the field. The question I answered is: “what should the 3D model be generating? Points, meshes, or voxels?” In DeepSDF paper, I proposed that we should generate a “function,” that takes input as a 3D coordinate and outputs a field value corresponding to that coordinate, where the “function” is represented as a neural network. This neural coordinate-based representation is memory-efficient, differentiable, and expressive, and is at the core of huge progress our community has made for 3D generative modeling and reconstruction. 3D faces with apperance and geometry generated by our AI model Two contributions I would like to make. First, I would like to enable AI generation of large-scale, dynamic, and interactable 3D world, which will benefit entertainment, autonomous agent training (robotics and self-driving) and various other scientific fields such as 3D medical imaging. Second, I would like to devise a new and more efficient neural network architecture that mimics our brains better. The current AI models are highly inefficient in terms of how they learn from data (requires a huge number of labels), difficult to train continuously and with verbal/visual instructions. I would like to develop a new architecture and learning methods that address these current limitations. Shobita Parthasarathy studies the governance of emerging science and technology as well as the politics of evidence and expertise in policymaking, in comparative and international perspective. She has a long-standing interest in the use and regulation of genomic and genetic data. Her first two books, Building Genetic Medicine: Breast Cancer, Technology, and the Comparative Politics of Health Care (MIT Press, 2007) and Patent Politics: Life Forms, Markets, and the Public Interest in the United States and Europe, (University of Chicago Press, 2017) cover these themes. Using comparative and qualitative interpretive research methods, she studies the the ethics, politics, and economics of data collection and interpretation. This includes concerns about consent and intellectual property in genomic databases, the social implications of commodifying data, the use of personal data in determining access to social services and health care, and the use of data for social justice and public good. Her current research focuses on the politics of inclusive innovation in international development, with a focus in India. She is interested in how political culture and ideology shape what counts as inclusive “innovation”, and in the implications for social and political order—particularly the “empowerment” of poor girls and women. Accomplishments and Awards Cecilia Muñoz, Alondra Nelson visit UMich for inaugural Ford Dean’s Symposium Josh Pasek is Associate Professor of Communication Studies and Faculty Associate in the Center for Political Studies at the University of Michigan, and a MIDAS Associate Director.  His substantive research explores how new media and psychological processes each shape political attitudes, public opinion, and political behaviors.  Josh also examines issues in the measurement of public opinion including techniques for incorporating social trace data as a means of tracking attitudes and behaviors.  Current research evaluates whether the use of online social networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter might be changing the political information environment, and assesses the conditions under which nonprobability samples, such as those obtained from big data methods or samples of Internet volunteers can lead to conclusions similar to those of traditional probability samples.  His work has been published in Public Opinion Quarterly, Political Communication, Communication Research, and the Journal of Communication among other outlets.  He also maintains two R packages for producing survey weights (anesrake) and analyzing weighted survey data (weights). My research deals with functional MRI data acquisition and analysis. My areas of interest include brain network connectivity; multimodal imaging; real-time fMRI neurofeedback; and the use of multivariate and data-driven analysis techniques, including machine learning. The BIOINSPIRED MATERIALS LAB is an interdisciplinary research group working on biomaterials science, polymer chemistry, soft matter physics, and nanotechnology, with focus on exploring biological and bioinspired functional materials to develop solutions for healthcare, robotics, and sustainability. Particularly, we are interested in multiscale modeling of soft biomaterials (from molecular dynamics to continuum models) and learning/control methods in microrobotics. IN MEMORIAM 1962-2022 Huei Peng was a Professor at the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Michigan and served as the Director of Mcity , which studies connected and autonomous vehicle technologies and promotes their deployment. His research interests included adaptive control and optimal control, with emphasis on their applications to vehicular and transportation systems. His research focuses included design and control of electrified vehicles, and connected/automated vehicles. I am new to researching in Artificial Intelligence used in Atmospheric Sciences. Previous experience is in comparing satellite data products with 3-D global simulations. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: A Machine-Learning Approach to Reduce Uncertainty in Climate Forcing by Aerosols My group is deeply involved in building, operating and analyzing the data of the world’s most sensitive dark matter detectors. We reached the sensitivity to detect quanta, therefore generating a very large amount of very complex data, containing novel signatures and hopefully to discover dark matter. Modern machine learning and data science methods allow us to analyze these data sets unprecedented sensitivity and to also gain new insights and potential discoveries in astroparticle, nuclear physics and neutrino physics. Brian E. Perron, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor at the University of Michigan’s School of Social Work. Dr. Perron received his Ph.D. from Washington University in St. Louis and a specialization in Data Science from Johns Hopkins University. Dr. Perron has extensive experience in services research for persons with mental health and substance use disorders. His research ( NCBI , Google Scholar ) has been supported by the National Institutes of Health, Department of Veterans Affairs, and the State of Michigan. He recently published books on the topics of measurement ( Oxford University Press ) and social work practice ( Sage Publications ). Dr. Perron’s recent work focuses on helping community-based organizations more effectively use administrative data to improve service delivery and other business processes.This includes developing user-friendly and sustainable data management systems; using data visualizations to facilitate interpretation of data, especially for non-technical users; and building organizational capacity to promote data-driven decision making. Research in my lab occurs within a multidisciplinary and translational space that promotes greater understanding of issues in public health, clinical rehabilitation, human performance, and physiology. My specific research interests have been devoted to physical activity epidemiology and behavioral interventions for the treatment/prevention of obesity and related cardiometabolic diseases, frailty, functional motor declines, and early mortality. Although predictive models based on healthy cohorts have a certain degree of generalizability, it is necessary to better understand populations at heightened risk. Our current and future research efforts are therefore directed at understanding and identifying precision strategies to prevent metabolic dysregulation and secondary musculoskeletal pathology among children and adults with neuromuscular impairments, as well as a variety of frailty syndromes. Our primary data collection occurs through typical clinical and basic laboratory studies, high throughput imaging, and remote sensing/tracking of human movement and various biomarkers. Numerous secondary, large-data analysis efforts are also incorporated for epidemiologic studies utilizing nationally-representative samples. Data science applications : Connecting statistical models and disease data; design of behavioral interventions with remote sensing and messaging; understanding pediatric cardiometabolic and muscle health; sports analytics and human performance; population-based epidemiology/surveillance; secondary disease disparities among acquired and chronic frailty syndromes Normalized strength growth percentile curves with polynomials for men (A) and women (B) from quantile regression (Peterson and Krishnan, 2015). My research at ICPSR is developing ingest and curation workflows for new data types (including EEG) to ensure these data are Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR) within data repositories. My funded projects and programs: National Addiction and HIV Data Archive Program (NAHDAP) funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) Health and Medical Care Archive funded by Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) Archive of Data on Disability to Enhance Policy and research (ADDEP) funded by NIH Our team leads research on the Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications (ELSI) of learning health systems and related enterprises. Our research uses mixed methods to understand policies and practices that make data science methods (data collection and curation, AI, computable algorithms) trustworthy for patients, providers, and the public. Our work engages multiple stakeholders including providers and health systems, as well as the general public and minoritized communities on issues such as AI-enabled clinical decision support, data sharing and privacy, and consent for data use in precision oncology. My current research focus is on modeling and simulating the value and benefits of various data sharing and policy trade offs. Typically these utilize system dynamics methodologies and tools. I also have considerable experience across multiple industries with developing processes to enable industry and faculty to identify and solve data science problems using SAS tools. My work falls into three general application areas. I am an applied (accredited) biostatistician with a strong team science motivation and I collaborate with scientists in primarily the biomedical sciences, contributing expertise in experimental design, statistical analysis/modeling, and data visualization. I have held faculty appointments in Schools of Medicine and Nursing, and also worked as a senior scientist in the Human Research Program at the NASA Johnson Space Center. I currently direct an Applied Biostatistics Laboratory and Data Management Core within the UM School of Nursing, and maintain several collaborative research programs within the School, at NASA, and with collaborators elsewhere. Keshav Pokhrel, PhD, is Assistant Professor of Statistics at the University of Michigan, Dearborn. Prof. Pokhrel’s research interests include the epidemiology of cancer, time series forecasting, quantile regression and functional data analysis. The skewed and non-normal data are increasingly more frequent than ever before. The data in the extreme ends are of their own importance. Hence the importance of quantile regression. The availability of the information is increasingly functional. My current work is gearing towards functional data analysis techniques such as principal differential analysis which can estimate a system of differential equations to reveal the dynamics of real data. Professor Pollock has taught courses in decision analysis, mathematical modeling, dynamic programming, and stochastic processes. He has applied operations research and decision analysis methods to problems in defense, criminal justice, manufacturing, epidemiology and medicine. He has authored over 60 technical papers, co-edited two books, and has served as a consultant to over 30 organizations, and on the editorial boards of three major journals. He was chair of the IOE Department, chaired the University’s Research Policies Committee and Tenure Committee, served as Director of the Engineering College’s Financial Engineering Program and Engineering Global Leadership Program, was a member the College of Engineering’s Executive Committee, and a recipient of the College’s Attwood Award. He has served on and chaired various NSF and NRC advisory boards and panels, and on the Army Science Board. He was President of the Operations Research Society of America, was awarded the 2001 INFORMS Kimball Medal, is a fellow of INFORMS and AAAS and is a member of the National Academy of Engineering My research focuses on understanding, designing, and evaluating learning technologies and environments that foster collaborative problem solving, spatial reasoning, engineering design thinking and agency. I am particularly interested in applying multimodal learning analytics in the context of co-located and/or virtually distributed teams in clinical simulations. I strive to utilize evidence in education science, simulation-based training and learning analytics to understand how people become expert health professionals, how they can better work in teams and how we can support these processes to foster health care delivery and health outcomes. I am an infectious disease and preventive medicine physician and my interests include studying the epidemiology of communicable diseases and and the practice of public health. I’m a clinical assistant professor in the Department of Epidemiology at the School of Public Health and in the Division of Infectious Diseases at the Medical School. My work also focuses on connecting physicians to public health practice; I serve as the Program Director for the Preventive Medicine Residency and I lead a certificate program in population health and health equity for physicians in training. I’m also an associate editor for the American Journal of Preventive Medicine. My research focuses on the epidemiology and prevention of infectious disease, including communicable diseases in the broader public health setting. My research interest include information theory, coding theory, distributed data processing, quantum information theory, quantum field theory. My research interests include security, privacy, and adversarial machine learning. More information about some of the current projects can be found at https://iotsecurity.engin.umich.edu . 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. An adversarial testing pipeline to fool machine learning classifiers. A STOP sign is being modified using stickers so that a state-of-the-art classifier is fooled into thinking it is a 45 SPEED LIMIT sign. For more details, visit https://iotsecurity.engin.umich.edu (Robust Physical Perturbations tab) My research group uses molecular techniques and computational methods to dissect the biology of pediatric cancers. We are invested in fundamental genomic discovery of non-canonical open reading frames that are dysregulated in cancer. We use functional genomics techniques to facilitate biological analysis. We employ data science methodologies to model and predict the molecular biology of cancers. Our particular focus is on RNA translation and its regulation. We also focus on therapeutic interventions that may represent novel treatment strategies for cancer. What are some of your most interesting projects? I am fascinated by the ways in which cancer cells pattern RNA translation. We are currently performing large-scale -omic analyses to identify patterns in RNA translational control across pediatric brain cancers. How did you end up where you are today? I came to science late in life. I studied English Literature as an undergraduate at Tufts University before deciding to study biochemistry as a senior in college. This led me to join a cancer biology lab after college, which motivated me to go to medical school. I enrolled in the University of Michigan Medical School in 2006 but quickly became interested in the biology of cancer. I then joined the Medical Scientist Training Program and graduated with an MD/PhD dual degree in 2014. I pursued Pediatrics clinical training at Boston Children’s Hospital and pediatric hematology/oncology at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. I then completed post-doctoral research at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard prior to joining the faculty of the University of Michigan. What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? My goal is to cure childhood brain cancers. That is what motivates me every day! Broadly, I study legal decision making, including decisions related to crime and employment. I typically use large social science data bases, but also collect my own data using technology or surveys. I study how law shapes innovation in the life sciences, with a substantial focus on big data and artificial intelligence in medicine. I write about the intellectual property incentives and protections for data and AI algorithms, the privacy issues with wide-scale health- and health-related data collection, the medical malpractice implications of AI in medicine, and how FDA should regulate the use of medical AI. My primary research is focused on measurement and monitoring of risks in banks, both at the individual bank level and at the level of financial system as a whole. In a recent paper, we have developed a high-dimension statistical approach to measure connectivity across different players in the financial sector. We implement our model using stock return data for US banks, insurance companies and hedge funds. Some of my early research has developed analytical tools to measure banks’ default risk using option pricing models and other tools of financial economics. These projects have often a significant empirical component that uses large financial datasets and econometric tools. Of late, I have been working on several projects related to the issue of equity and inclusion in financial markets. These papers use large datasets from financial markets to understand differences in the quantity and quality of financial services received by minority borrowers. A common theme across these projects is the issue of causal inference using state-of-the art tools from econometrics. Finally, some of ongoing research projects are related to FinTech with a focus on credit scoring and online lending. Accomplishments and Awards Cashless Payments: Faster Transactions, Easier Borrowing and Increased Household Income My research fields are investigations of the mechanical and chemical properties of materials by applying theoretical and computational tools, including first-principles calculations, atomistic simulations, multiscale modeling, and how to apply machine learning to overcome the size/time scale limitations that widely exist in these computational studies. As shown in the following picture, a recent example of my research is to construct the physics-informed machine learning surrogate model to quickly predict material parameters related to their strength and ductility, otherwise, these parameters can only obtain from costly first-principles calculations and/or atomistic simulations. Accomplishments and Awards $2M to fast track stronger alloys His research interest lies in the intersection of signal processing, data science, machine learning, and numerical optimization. He is particularly interested in computational methods for learning low-complexity models from high-dimensional data, leveraging tools from machine learning, numerical optimization, and high dimensional geometry, with applications in imaging sciences, scientific discovery, and healthcare. Recently, he is also interested in understanding deep networks through the lens of low-dimensional modeling. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Machine Learning Guided Co-design for Reconstructive Spectroscopy Our research group studies how and why an organism’s traits (“phenotypes”) evolve in natural populations. Explaining the mechanisms that generate and regulate patterns of phenotypic diversity is a major goal of evolutionary biology: why do we see rapid shifts to strikingly new and distinct character states, and how stable are these evolutionary transitions across space and time? To answer these questions, we generate and analyze high-throughput “big data” on both genomes and phenotypes across the 18,000 species of reptiles and amphibians across the globe. Then, we use the statistical tools of phylogenetic comparative analysis, geometric morphometrics of 3D anatomy generated from CT scans, and genome annotation and comparative transcriptomics to understand the integrated trait correlations that create complex phenotypes. Currently, we are using machine learning and neural networks to study the color patterns of animals vouchered into biodiversity collections and test hypotheses about the ecological causes and evolutionary consequences of phenotypic innovation. We are especially passionate about the effective and accurate visualization of large-scale multidimensional datasets, and we prioritize training in both best practices and new innovations in quantitative data display. The Rabosky lab seeks to understand how and why life on Earth became so diverse. We focus primarily on large-scale patterns of species diversification (speciation and extinction) and on the tempo and mode of phenotypic evolution, to better understand what regulates the “amount” of biodiversity through Deep Time. To this end, we develop theoretical frameworks and computational tools for studying evolutionary dynamics using DNA-sequence-based evolutionary trees (phylogenies), the fossil record, as well as phenotypic data from present-day species (morphology, ecology). We develop and apply a range of methods involving supervised and unsupervised learning, including Markov chain Monte Carlo, hierarchical mixture models, hidden Markov models, latent feature models, and more. We are increasingly interested in complex morphological and ecological traits, which – due to a rapidly expanding data universe – represent a tremendous opportunity for the field to answer long-standing questions about how organisms evolve. At these same time, we are embracing the analytical challenges of these data, because fully realizing their potential requires the development of new analytical paradigms that go beyond the limitations of traditional parametric models for low-dimensional data. Automatic feature identification from a large-scale evolutionary tree (phylogeny) using a compound model of the generating process (speciation, extinction) developed in the Rabosky lab. Colors correspond to distinct evolutionary rate regimes as estimated using Markov chain Monte Carlo. This method revealed widespread heterogeneity in the rate of species formation during 350 million years of ray-finned fish evolution. Warm colors = fast rates; cool colors = slow rates. Accomplishments and Awards Snakes Are Evolutionary Superstars Prof. Majdi Radaideh leads the Artificial Intelligence and Multiphysics Simulations lab (AIMS), which focuses on the intersection between nuclear reactor design, nuclear multiphysics modeling and simulation, advanced computational methods, and machine learning algorithms to drive advanced reactor research and improve the sustainability of the current reactor fleet. AIMS extensively employs data science and machine learning methods for various goals including but not limited to: 1- Development of surrogate models for expensive nuclear reactor simulations in steady-state and time-dependent modes using convolutional and recurrent neural networks. 2- Large-scale combinatorial optimization to improve the performance of the nuclear fuel inside nuclear power plants using physics-informed reinforcement learning and neuroevolution algorithms. 3- Long-short term memory and ensemble methods for anomaly detection and fault prognosis to monitor the health of the nuclear power plant components. 4- Uncertainty quantification of data-driven models with Bayesian inference and Gaussian processes. 5- Natural language processing methods to process nuclear plant maintenance and burnup records. My research focuses on the intersection between mobile technology, parenting, parent-child interaction, and child development of processes such as executive functioning, self-regulation, and social-emotional well-being. Our projects use a combination of methods including surveys, videotaped parent-child interaction tasks, time diaries, and mobile device app logging to examine how parents and young children use mobile technologies throughout their day. We have developed novel content analysis approaches to understand the experience of young children while using commercially available mobile apps – including advertising content, educational quality, and data collection. We emphasize questions that are relevant to everyday parenting experiences, and also consider what design changes would help create an optimal default environment for children and families. Accomplishments and Awards Strategies To Break Free From Smartphone Distractions Dr. Raghunathan’s primary research interest is in developing methods for dealing with missing data in sample surveys and in epidemiological studies. The methods are motivated from a Bayesian perspective but with desirable frequency or repeated sampling properties. The analysis of incomplete data from practical sample surveys poses additional problems due to extensive stratification, clustering of units and unequal probabilities of selection. The model-based approach provides a framework to incorporate all the relevant sampling design features in dealing with unit and item nonresponse in sample surveys. There are important computational challenges in implementing these methods in practical surveys. He has developed SAS based software, IVEware, for performing multiple imputation analysis and the analysis of complex survey data. Raghunathan’s other research interests include Bayesian methods, methods for small area estimation, combining information from multiple surveys, measurement error models, longitudinal data analysis, privacy, confidentiality and disclosure limitations and statistical methods for epidemiological studies. His applied interests include cardiovascular epidemiology, social epidemiology, health disparity, health care utilization, and social and economic sciences. Raghunathan is also involved in the Survey Methodology Program at the Institute for Social Research, a multidisciplinary team of sociologists, statisticians and psychologists, provides an opportunity to address methodological issues in: nonresponse, interviewer behavior and its impact on the results, response or measurement bias and errors, noncoverage, respondent cognition, privacy and confidentiality issues and data archiving. The Survey Methodology Program has a graduate program offering masters and doctoral degrees in survey methodology. Indika Rajapakse, PhD, is Professor of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, Medical School, with a secondary appointment in Mathematics, College of Literature, Science, and the Arts at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Rajapakse’s research is focused on the dynamics of genome organization in human cells, with emphasis on gaining a deeper understanding of how the cell cycle guides cell fate determination. Prof. Rajapakse and his team are developing genomic and imaging technologies for determining the natural dynamics of the cell cycle and building a data guided mathematical foundation. Their long term goal is to develop strategies for direct reprogramming of normal and abnormal cells Prof. Raman’s work focuses on the simulation of large scale combustion systems – aircraft engines, stationary power turbines, hypersonic engines – with the goal of advancing computations-aided systems design. This involves large scale computations accounting for detailed behavior of the chaotic turbulent flow in these systems, combined with enabling science in computational chemistry and algorithms. One aspect of my research is the prediction of rare events that lead to catastrophic system failure (as in flight crash, engine failure etc.). This work also involves the understanding of uncertainty in models, and streamlining knowledge in the form of mathematical models. My research focuses on the intersection of translational medicine, device innovation, and clinical trial design, leveraging advanced data science methodologies to improve patient outcomes in nephrology and vascular access. Specifically, I apply machine learning, predictive analytics, and real-world evidence methodologies to enhance the effectiveness of novel medical devices and optimize clinical workflows. My work also includes AI-driven decision support systems to enhance treatment pathways while addressing health disparities by ensuring diverse, representative datasets. Additionally, I also collaborate with deep learning techniques for medical imaging analysis, particularly in the automated evaluation of dialysis vascular access patency and thrombotic risk prediction. Through these data science-driven approaches, my goal is to advance precision medicine in nephrology, accelerate medical device innovation, and improve the quality of care for patients with kidney disease and related conditions. One of my most exciting projects is CORE (“COnnecting REsearch”), an innovative software platform that democratizes clinical trials by leveraging AI and machine learning to optimize trial design, recruitment, and retention. CORE intelligently matches participants with clinical trials based on eligibility, demographics, and preferences, ensuring a more inclusive and efficient recruitment process. By reducing participant burden and enhancing accessibility, it improves the clinical trial experience while increasing diversity and representation in research. CORE also integrates AI-driven predictive analytics to refine clinical trial design, optimizing site selection, patient stratification, and adaptive trial methodologies. By harnessing real-world data, it helps sponsors enhance recruitment, reduce costs, and improve retention—leading to more efficient, generalizable, and impactful trial outcomes. Ultimately, CORE bridges the gap between researchers and participants, transforming clinical research accessibility and equity. My research journey has been driven by a deep passion for translational medicine, medical device innovation, and health equity. Early in my career, I recognized the significant gaps in access, efficiency, and diversity in clinical trials and patient care, particularly in nephrology and vascular access. This led me to explore data science and AI-driven solutions to improve clinical workflows, optimize device efficacy, and enhance patient outcomes. Following which my work on catheter-associated infections, dialysis vascular access, and acute kidney injury reinforced the need for more inclusive and efficient research methodologies, inspiring me to develop CORE (“COnnecting REsearch”)—a platform that democratizes clinical trials using AI-powered participant matching and trial optimization. Through a combination of clinical expertise, data science methodologies, and a commitment to diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI), I have built a research portfolio that bridges technology and patient care, ensuring that innovation in medicine is accessible, equitable, and impactful. As teaching faculty, Suraj spends his time teaching students how to think critically with data. He teaches students the theoretical foundations of data science, from empirical risk minimization, linear algebra, and probability, to more practical aspects, from tabular data manipulation and web scraping to model building and cross-validation, with an emphasis on implementation in Python. He’s particularly interested in introducing computational thinking skills to students with no prior programming experience.  Jeffrey Regier received a PhD in statistics from UC Berkeley (2016) and joined the University of Michigan as an assistant professor. His research interests include graphical models, Bayesian inference, high-performance computing, deep learning, astronomy, and genomics. Reich conducts global change research on plants, soils, ecosystems and people across a range of scales. His work links fundamental physiology with community dynamics and ecosystem structure and function, from the patch to the globe, within the context of the myriad of global environmental challenges that face us. This includes studying the effects on natural and human ecosystems of rising CO2 and associated climate change, biodiversity loss, and wildfire. This research involves a variety of tools and approaches (long-term experiments, observations, global data compilations, statistical and simulation models), a diverse set of ecosystems (boreal forest, temperate grassland, and more), and a range of scales (local, regional, global). The overarching goal is to understand what we humans are doing to nature in order to help orchestrate a shift towards a nature-forward prioritization that will in turn support and sustain human society. I studied physics and creative writing and became interested in the fate of our environment; over time I began using tools from each focal area to advance ecological science in a changing world Dr. Resnicow studies tailored behavior change interventions, natural language processing of clinical encounters, analyses of large datasets related to obesity and other chronic diseases, novel designs such as SMART, MOST, and reinforcement learning, and applied complex systems and chaos theory in behavior change. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Developing Language-based Tools For Real-Time Counseling Feedback “Professor Revzen and his team at the Biologically Inspired Robotics and Dynamical Systems (BIRDS) Lab are working on discovering, modeling, and reproducing the strategies animals use when interacting with physical objects. This work consists of collaboration with biomechanists to analyze experimental data, developing new mathematical tools for modeling and estimation of model parameters, and construction of robots which employ the new principles.” Applications of computational tools for molecular modeling (Discovery Studio, ICM-Pro, MOE, and YASARA) and data science (ADMET Predictor, KNIME, Origin Pro, Prism, Python, and R) to computational toxicology, drug discovery, homology modeling, molecular dynamics, and protein structure/function prediction. Current special interests include therapeutics for neurodegenerative disorders (Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and motor neuron diseases) and infectious diseases (COVID-19). 3D alignment of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) from mouse (magenta) and electric eel (gray) showing the amino acid residues of the catalytic triad. Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Combating and predicting drug resistance using a hybrid mechanistic machine learning model I completed my PhD in sociology at UNC Chapel Hill followed by teaching at Washington University St. Louis, a postdoctoral fellowship at Duke with the sociology department and population research institute, and I am now a research scientist at the UM Institute for Social Research in the Landscapes of Population Health program. In my research I use quantitative, archival, spatial, and computational methods to study historical social change; exposure to stressors, risk, and resources; immigration; and population health. I am especially interested in how historical practices of racial control provoke changes in local institutions and cultures that unfold across historical time into the development of contemporary place-based disparities. In this work I collaborate across disciplines with sociologists, historians, geographers, epidemiologists, demographers, criminologists, environmental scientists, and more. To date, I have published my research in the American Journal of Epidemiology, Nature: Scientific Data, Socius, The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, and Social Currents. I use computational methods to collect and analyze historical data, to produce data resources for use by other scientific researchers, and have taught courses on computational text analysis, statistical analysis, and research methods. I am also serving as co-investigator on several grants related to structural racism and population health inequities in the United States. I am currently developing a project to simulate kinship networks estimating the scope of bereavement from fatal police violence. A related project uses agent-based models to simulate selection into social institutions and networks, exploring how social processes like selection and segregation impact inference and segment information spaces, posing challenges for learning and prediction from modeling. I hope to contribute to our understanding of how history impacts contemporary social outcomes. Specifically refining our ability to model and understand the pathways of change and persistence in social institutions and culture over time, shaping place-based heterogeneity in contemporary inequality. I am excited to use insights from social science research and geography to build simulation models exploring the ways that social processes like selection, clustering and segregation impact our confidence in inference from computational models. To both estimate how social processes segment information spaces in ways that can inform our models, and to gain useful estimates of social processes. I enjoy collaboration, both in playing music in my spare time, and in exploring new research ideas at work. My main interest is theoretical statistics as implied to complex model from semiparametric to ultra high dimensional regression analysis. In particular the negative aspects of Bayesian and causal analysis as implemented in modern statistics. An analysis of the position of SCOTUS judges. “Neighborhood Environments as Socio-Techno-bio Systems: Water Quality, Public Trust, and Health in Mexico City (NESTSMX)” is an NSF-funded multi-year collaborative interdisciplinary project that brings together experts in environmental engineering, anthropology, and environmental health from the University of Michigan and the Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública. The PI is Elizabeth Roberts (anthropology), and the co-PIs are Brisa N. Sánchez (biostatistics), Martha M Téllez-Rojo (public health), Branko Kerkez (environmental engineering), and Krista Rule Wigginton (civil and environmental engineering). Our overarching goal for NESTSMX is to develop methods for understanding neighborhoods as “socio-techno-bio systems” and to understand how these systems relate to people’s trust in (or distrust of) their water. In the process, we will collectively contribute to our respective fields of study while we learn how to merge efforts from different disciplinary backgrounds. NESTSMX works with families living in Mexico City, that participate in an ongoing longitudinal birth-cohort chemical-exposure study (ELEMENT (Early Life Exposures in Mexico to ENvironmental Toxicants, U-M School of Public Health). Our research involves ethnography and environmental engineering fieldwork which we will combine with biomarker data previously gathered by ELEMENT. Our focus will be on the infrastructures and social structures that move water in and out of neighborhoods, households, and bodies. Testing Real-Time Domestic Water Sensors in Mexico City Alex’s research interests include machine learning, time series, multi-agent systems, uncertainty quantification, and scientific modeling. His recent focus is on developing trustworthy AI systems that can offer insightful guidance for critical decisions, especially in applications involving complex spatiotemporal dynamics. His work is primarily motivated by real-world problems in public health, environmental health and community resilience. My research focuses on the empirical and theoretical analysis of social and information networks. I am particularly interested in understanding the mechanisms involved in network evolution, information diffusion, and interactions among people on the Web and in complex organizations. I am a biological anthropologist who studies the ecological causes and evolutionary consequences of social behavior. Humans and many other animals develop myriad social relationships across the course of their lifetimes. My lab members and I study how these relationships develop and are maintained, what their consequences are for participants, and how individual relationships impact evolutionary dynamics. I also study how relationships and physiology impact one another, and how their interactions affect health, longevity, and reproductive success. My primary field and laboratory research focuses on a wild population of endangered mountain gorillas in Rwanda that has been monitored for more than 50 years. In addition to studying gorillas, I also work on complementary research questions about human and non-human primate health, evolution, and sociality using the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey (a long-term study of humans in Cebu, the Philippines), and data collected for the Amboseli Baboon Research Project, in southern Kenya. My research program integrates behavioral, demographic, genetic, ecological, and physiological data to gain a richer understanding of the evolution of mammals generally, and the hominid lineage specifically. Additional Information What are some of your most interesting projects? The things that happen to us early in our lives often have major impacts on our health and wellness many years later. Interestingly, this phenomenon does not appear to be unique to humans; similar effects are observed in many species. My colleagues and I are working to understand why and how this happens. Using data from long-term primate field sites, we are examining the connections between negative experiences during the nonhuman primate equivalent of childhood, and the animals’ longevity, health, and social relationships as adults. One of the interesting challenges for this project is figuring out how to define and measure ‘health’ in other animals–and in particular, in animals that we can’t touch due to ethical, safety, and conservation concerns. Advances in non-invasive physiological research have improved our ability to determine what is happening inside their bodies without the aid of (e.g.) blood or tissue. How did you end up where you are today? As a child, I was endlessly fascinated with other animals and the way they behaved. Everyone, including me, assumed that I would be a veterinarian when I grew up, but I was never excited about the idea of practicing medicine. In college, I accidentally stumbled across a class on primate behavior, and fell completely in love with the subject. I was fortunate to have faculty mentors who encouraged my interest in research, and 20+ years later, now I am working to help others establish their own research careers. Having a job that involves asking and answering questions about what we do (and don’t!) have in common with other species is a dream come true. My main research interest lies in experimental economics, social networks and social learning. I am particularly interested in how people aggregate information from social networks and news sources and form posterior beliefs. I use regression techniques to uncover causal relationships as well as classification to reduce the dimensionality of data. Some of my recent research looks at how people update beliefs when they derive direct utility from beliefs. This occurs, for example, when people receive feedback on their ability. They often seem to weigh positive information more strongly than negative information. I am also interested in understanding differences between statistical and anecdotal reasoning. Under statistical reasoning, people have known objectives and they update beliefs through Bayes’ rule. Under anecdotal reasoning, people recall anecdotes that are relevant for forming a belief about a new objective that has not been encountered before. In these situations, memory recall and recognition are important to understand the formation of beliefs. My reserach group–theNeurobionics Lab–has two chief goals. Firstly, we seek to answer fundamental questions about human locomotion through a deeper understanding of how limb mechanics are felt and regulated by the nervous system. These properties are important because they govern how people respond to disturbances during gait, such as unexpectedly stepping on an obstacle, or carefully walking over uneven terrain. Moreover, the ability to regulate these mechanics is drastically impaired following neurological injury. As a result, impaired individuals fall more frequently, fatigue faster, and have abnormal gait patterns that inhibit daily life. The more we understand about how the brain controls the body during locomotion, the better we can assess, track, and treat the changes that occur following neurological injury. The second mission of the group is to develop technologies that address the deficits that arise from neuropathologies and amputation. We leverage biomimetic design and control approaches to develop novel wearable robotic systems. Our intent is to not only address the locomotor deficits of these individuals, but also enable them to exceed the performance of their able-bodied counterparts. Our approach is unique: the biomechanical science that we discover is used to develop a new class of assistive technology. Through interdisciplinary, bidirectional feedback between science and engineering, the Neurobionics Lab conducts innovative work that will eventually impact the lives of the disabled. My research focuses on the development and evaluation of novel interventions that leverage emerging technologies to train members of the healthcare workforce around adhering to guidelines. I study how to scale custom designed teaching and learning platforms and evaluate their use to motivate effective communication and dissemination of evidence based practice. Other emphases of my work include health policy literacy, translation and communication of health services research, and improving health system literacy in urban communities. I have developed and evaluated numerous web based educational interventions that employ the “flipped classroom” design with an emphasis on understanding the data and analytics that guide successful implementation and promote high fidelity for members of the healthcare workforce. As an implementation scientist, I rely on the integration of data and analytics to understand what motivates successful program implementation. In addition to the development of these platforms, I have extensive experience developing and evaluating online, hybrid residential, residential courses, and MOOCs related to healthcare management, non-profit management, healthcare finance, and health economics that employ engaging lessons and modules, interactive graphics, and a blended learning format to aid health professions students, and both undergraduate and graduate public health students in understanding the healthcare system. My MOOC entitled “Understanding and Improving the U.S. Health Care System” has been taken by over 5,000 learners and is characterized by the use of “big data” to understand how future healthcare providers learn health policy. Joseph Ryan, PhD, is Associate Professor of Social Work, School of Social Work and Faculty Associate in the Center for Political Studies, ISR, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Ryan’s research and teaching build upon his direct practice experiences with child welfare and juvenile justice populations. Dr. Ryan is the Co-Director of the Child and Adolescent Data, an applied research center focused on using big data to drive policy and practice decisions in the field. Dr. Ryan is currently involved with several studies including a randomized clinical trial of recovery coaches for substance abusing parents in Illinois (AODA Demonstration), a foster care placement prevention study for young children in Michigan (MiFamily Demonstration), a Pay for Success (social impact bonds) study focused on high risk adolescents involved with the Illinois child welfare and juvenile justice system and a study of the educational experiences of youth in foster care (Kellogg Foundation Education and Equity). Dr. Ryan is committed to building strong University and State partnerships that utilize big data and data visualization tools to advance knowledge and address critical questions in the fields of child welfare and juvenile justice. My research focuses on the subfield of political communication using three primary quantitative methodologies: surveys, experiments (both psychological and behavioral economic), and content coding of text. My research has looked at the content of campaign websites, scholar’s social media accounts, newspaper coverage of elections as well as networked participants involving mock elections in a lab.My research focuses on the subfield of political communication using three primary quantitative methodologies: surveys, experiments (both psychological and behavioral economic), and content coding of text. My research has looked at the content of campaign websites, scholar’s social media accounts, newspaper coverage of elections as well as networked participants involving mock elections in a lab. Dr. Greg Rybarczyk is an Associate Professor of Geography at the University of Michigan-Flint. He is also a Fellow at the Urban Design/Mental Health Institute (UK) and Director of the GIS program. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and has over a decade of experience utilizing geospatial and empirical approaches to examine active transportation, mobility, travel sentiment, urban design, accessibility, food systems, and public health. Recent works: Platt, L., and G. Rybarczyk. (2020) “Skateboarder and scooter rider perceptions of the urban environment: A qualitative analysis of user generated content,” Urban Geography, DOI: 10.1080/02723638.2020.1811554. Rybarczyk, G. , A. Ozbil, E. Andresen, and Z. Hayes. (2020) “Physiological responses to urban design during bicycling: A naturalistic investigation,” Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour, 68: 79-93; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2019.12.001 Rybarczyk, G. and S. Banerjee. (2015) Visualizing active travel sentiment in an urban context, Journal of Transport and Health, 2(2): 30 Rybarczyk, G. , S. Banerjee, M. Starking-Szymanski, and R. Shaker. (2018) “Travel and us: The impact of mode share on sentiment using geosocial media data and GIS,” Journal of Location-Based Services 12(1): 40-62 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. Professor Saigal has held faculty positions at the Haas School of Business, Berkeley and the department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences at Northwestern University, has been a researcher at the Bell Telephone Laboratories and numerous short term visiting positions. He currently teaches courses in Financial Engineering. In the recent past he taught courses in optimization, and Management Science. His current research involves data based studies of operational problems in the areas of Finance, Transportation, Renewable Energy and Healthcare, with an emphasis on the management and pricing of risks. This involves the use of data analytics, optimization, stochastic processes and financial engineering tools. His earlier research involved theoretical investigation into interior point methods, large scale optimization and software development for mathematical programming. He is an author of two books on optimization and large set of publications in top refereed journals. He has been an associate editor of Management Science and is a member of SIAM, AMS and AAAS. He has served as the Director of the interdisciplinary Financial Engineering Program and as the Director of Interdisciplinary Professional Programs (now Integrative Design + Systems) at the College of Engineering. Dr. Kazuhiro Saitou’s research areas are computational design, manufacturability-driven structural topology optimization, multi-material, multi-process, multi-component structural topology optimization (M^3 TO), computational optimal synthesis of structural assemblies, and physics-informed AI for structural and assembly optimization. The capacity to predict student success depends in part on our ability to understand “educationally purposeful” student behaviors and motivations and the relationship between behaviors and motivations and academic achievement. My research focuses on how to collect student behaviors germane to learning at a higher granularity and analyze the relationships between student performance and behaviors. Ultimately this research is aimed at designing and constructing an “earlier warning system” wherein student guidance is quasi-automated and informed by motivation, background and behaviors and delivered within weeks of the beginning of classes. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. My research interests are broad, but generally center on the causes and consequences of biodiversity loss at local, regional, and global scales with an explicit focus on global change drivers. Our work has been published in Science, Nature, Science Advances, Global Change Biology, PNAS, AREES, TREE, and Ecology Letters among other journals. We are especially interested in using AI and machine learning to explore broad-scale patterns of biodiversity and phenotypic variation, mostly in ants. I am a researcher specializing in discovering the consequences of computer systems that curate and organize culture. A major theme of my research investigates accountability mechanisms for machine learning and artificial intelligence. My research group coined the phrase “algorithmic auditing” in a 2014 paper; this was subsequently made suggested reading for submissions to the first ACM FAccT (Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency) Conferences. My work on algorithms and accountability was recommended by the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy in 2016 as one of five research strategies essential to the future of big data technologies in the US. I was the named plaintiff of a multi-year lawsuit against the federal government on behalf of computing researchers and journalists; this lawsuit changed the legal definition of “hacking” in the United States in 2022. I have also published research about social media, wireless systems, broadband Internet, online video, domain names, and Internet policy. My group blog about social media platforms was named one of the “Must-Follow Feeds” in science by Wired magazine. A researcher tests a counterfeit, unauthorized copy of allegedly privacy-protecting fabric stolen from Adam Harvey’s HyperFace design. Accomplishments and Awards Dworkin, Sandvig receive 2023 public engagement awards Dr. Saran is an internationally recognized expert in kidney disease research – specifically, in the area of kidney disease surveillance and epidemiology. From 2014 – 2019, he served as Director of the United States Renal Data System (USRDS; www.usrds.org), a ‘gold standard’ for kidney disease data systems, worldwide. Since 2006 he has been Co-Principal Investigator for the Centers for the Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) National CKD Surveillance System for the US, a one of a kind project that complements the USRDS, while focusing on upstream surveillance of CKD and its risk factors (www.cdc.org/ckd/surveillance). Both projects have influenced policy related to kidney disease in the US and were cited extensively in the July 2019 Advancing American Kidney Health Federal policy document. Dr. Saran led the development of the first National Kidney Disease Information System (VA-REINS), for the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), funded by the VA’s Center for Innovation, and one that led to the VA recognizing the importance of kidney disease as a health priority for US veterans. Dr. Saran has recently (2018-2021) been funded on a spin off project from VA REINS for investigation of ‘hot-spot’ of kidney disease among US Veterans involving both risk-prediction and geospatial analyses – a modern approach to health system big data being used for prevention and population health improvement, using kidney disease as an example. This approach has broad application for prevention and optimizing management of major chronic diseases. Accomplishments and Awards Mapping the Overlap of Poverty Level and Prevalence of Diagnosed Chronic Kidney Disease Among Medicare Beneficiaries in the United States My lab has two main areas of focus: molecular characteristics of head and neck cancer, and the intersection of regulatory genomics and pathway analysis. With head and neck cancer, we study tumor subtypes and biomarkers of prognosis, treatment response, and recurrence. We perform integrative omics analyses, dimension reduction methods, and prediction techniques, with the ultimate goal of identifying patient subsets who would benefit from either an additional targeted treatment or de-escalated treatment to increase quality of life. For regulatory genomics and pathway analysis, we develop statistical tests taking into account important covariates and other variables for weighting observations. P.T. Sathe is a lecturer in Industrial and Operations Engineering at the University of Michigan. Ramon Satyendra, PhD, is Associate Professor of Music Theory and Director of Graduate Studies in the School of Music, Theatre & Dance at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Professor Satyendra holds a doctorate from the University of Chicago in music theory and history. Before coming to Michigan, he taught at Yale University and the University of Chicago. He currently serves on the editorial boards of The Journal of Mathematics and Music , Intégral , and Analytical Approaches to World Music . Highlights of previous service to the field include Executive Committee of the Society of Music Theory, editorial board of Music Theory Spectrum , and editor of the Journal of Music Theory .  Among his awards are the Merten Hasse Award in Mathematics from the Mathematical Association of America and the Clauss Prize for Teaching Excellence in the Humanities from Yale University. He is a three-time fellow of the Mannes Institute for Advanced Studies in Music Theory. Satyendra’s research interests include music and mathematics, late nineteenth-century music, jazz, South Asian music, and compositional theory. He plays piano, organ, tabla, and guitar and has published in Music Theory Spectrum, Music Analysis, Journal of Music Theory, American Mathematical Monthly , and elsewhere. Matthew Schipper, PhD, is Professor in the Departments of Radiation Oncology and Biostatistics. He received his Ph.D. in Biostatistics from the University of Michigan in 2006. Prior to joining the Radiation Oncology department he was a Research Investigator in the Department of Radiology at the University of Michigan and a consulting statistician at Innovative Analytics. Prof. Schipper’s research interests include: Use of Biomarkers to Individualize Treatment – Selection of dose for cancer patients treated with Radiation Therapy (RT) must balance the increased efficacy with the increased toxicity associated with higher dose. Historically, a single dose has been selected for a population of patients (e.g. all stage III NSC lung cancer). However, the availability of new biologic markers for toxicity and efficacy allow the possibility of selecting a more personalized dose. I am interested in using statistical models for toxicity and efficacy as a function of RT dose and biomarkers to select an optimal dose for an individual patient. We are studying quantitative methods based on utilities to make this efficacy/toxicity tradeoff explicit and quantitative when biomarkers for one or multiple outcomes are available. We have proposed a simulation based method for studying the likely effects of any model or marker based dose selection on both toxicity and efficacy outcomes for a population of patients. In related projects, we are studying the role of correlation between the sensitivity of a patient’ tumor and normal tissues to radiation. We are also studying how to utilize these techniques in combination with baseline and/or mid-treatment adaptive image guided RT. Early Phase Oncology Study Design – An increasingly common feature of phase I designs is the inclusion of 1 or more dose expansion cohorts (DECs) in which the MTD is first estimated using a 3+3 or other Phase I design and then a fixed number (often 10-20 in 1-10 cohorts) of patients are treated at the dose initially estimated to be the MTD. Such an approach has not been studied statistically or compared to alternative designs. We have shown that a CRM design, in which the dose-assignment mechanism is kept active for all patients, more accurately identifies the MTD and protects the safety of trial patients than a similarly sized DEC trial. It also meets the objective of treating 15 or more patients at the final estimated MTD.  A follow-up paper evaluating the role of DECs with a focus on efficacy estimation is in press at Annals of Oncology. The Schloss lab is broadly interested in beneficial and pathogenic host-microbiome interactions with the goal of improving our understanding of how the microbiome can be used to reach translational outcomes in the prevention, detection, and treatment of colorectal cancer, Crohn’s disease, and Clostridium difficile infection. To address these questions, we test traditional ecological theory in the microbial context using a systems biology approach. Specifically, the laboratory specializes in using studies involving human subjects and animal models to understand how biological diversity affects community function using a variety of culture-independent genomics techniques including sequencing 16S rRNA gene fragments, metagenomics, and metatranscriptomics. In addition, they use metabolomics to understand the functional role of the gut microbiota in states of health and disease. To support these efforts, they develop and apply bioinformatic tools to facilitate their analysis. Most notable is the development of the mothur software package (https://www.mothur.org), which is one of the most widely used tools for analyzing microbiome data and has been cited more than 7,300 times since it was initially published in 2009. The Schloss lab deftly merges the ability to collect data to answer important biological questions using cutting edge wet-lab techniques and computational tools to synthesize these data to answer their biological questions. Given the explosion in microbiome research over the past 15 years, the Schloss lab has also stood at the center of a major effort to train interdisciplinary scientists in applying computational tools to study complex biological systems. These efforts have centered around developing reproducible research skills and applying modern data visualization techniques. An outgrowth of these efforts at the University of Michigan has been the institutionalization of The Carpentries organization on campus (https://carpentries.org), which specializes in peer-to-peer instruction of programming tools and techniques to foster better reproducibility and build a community of practitioners. The Schloss lab uses computational tools to integrate multi-omics tools in a culture-independent approach to understand how bacteria interact with each other and their host to drive processes such as colorectal cancer and susceptibility to Clostridium difficile infections. The current goal of our research is to learn enough about the physiology and ecology of microbes and microbial communities in the gut that we are able to engineer the gut microbiome to improve human health. The first target of our engineering is the production of butyrate – a common fermentation product of some gut microbes that is essential for human health. Butyrate is the preferred energy source for mitochondria in the epithelial cells lining the gut and it also regulates their gene expression. One of the most effective ways to influence the composition and metabolism of the gut microbiota is through diet. In an interventional study, we have tracked responses in the composition and fermentative metabolism of the gut microtiota in &gt;800 healthy individuals. Emerging patterns suggest several configurations of the microbiome that can result in increased production of butyrate acid. We have isolated the microbes that form an anaerobic food web to convert dietary fiber to butyrate and continue to make discoveries about their physiology and interactions. Based on these results, we have initiated a clinical trial in which we are hoping to prevent the development of Graft versus Host Disease following bone marrow transplants by managing butyrate production by the gut microbiota. We are also beginning to track hundreds of other metabolites from the gut microbiome that may influence human health. We use metagenomes and metabolomes to identify patterns that link the microbiota with their metabolites and then test those models in human organoids and gnotobiotic mice colonized with synthetic communities of microbes. This blend of wet-lab research in basic microbiology, data science and in ecology is moving us closer to engineering the gut microbiome to improve human health. My work lies at the intersection of human-computer interaction, social computing, social media. I direct the Living Online Lab, where we study and design online technologies that address vital societal issues including justice, equity, harassment, privacy, and dark patterns. Accomplishments and Awards TikTok: U-M experts available as the clock ticks on social media sale or ban My current research combines machine learning tools and economic approaches (e.g game theory, mechanism design, and information design) to develop and analyze systems for eliciting and aggregating information from of diverse group of agents with varying information, interests, and abilities. This work applies to scenarios where a collective decision-making process is required, such as peer grading, peer review, crowd-sourcing, content moderation, misinformation detection, surveys, and employment hiring/evaluation. More broadly, I am interested in multi-agent systems, a subfield of AI; data economics; and algorithmic game theory. Eric Schwartz, PhD, is Associate Professor of Marketing in the Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan, An Arbor. Prof. Schwartz’s expertise focuses on predicting customer behavior, understanding its drivers, and examining how firms actively manage their customer relationships through interactive marketing. His research in customer analytics stretches managerial applications, including online display advertising, email marketing, video consumption, and word-of-mouth. The quantitative methods he uses are primarily Bayesian statistics, machine learning, dynamic programming, and field experiments. His current projects aim to optimize firms’ A/B testing and adaptive marketing experiments using a multi-armed bandit framework. As marketers expand their ability to run tests of outbound marketing activity (e.g., sending emails/direct mail, serving display ads, customizing websites), this work guides marketers to be continuously “earning while learning.” While interacting with students and managers, Professor Schwartz works to illustrate how today’s marketers bridge the gap between technical skills and data-driven decision making. Professor Schwarz is an experimental particle physicist who has performed research in astro-particle physics, collider physics, as well as in accelerator physics and RF engineering. His current research focuses on discovering new physics in high-energy collisions with the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. His particular focus is in precision measurements of properties of the Higgs Boson and searching for new associated physics using advanced AI and machine learning techniques. I study patterns in large, complex data sets, and make quantitative predictions and inferences about those patterns. Problems I’ve worked on include classification, anomaly detection, active and semi-supervised learning, transfer learning, and density estimation. I am primarily interested in developing new algorithms and proving performance guarantees for new and existing algorithms. Examples of pulses generated from a neutron and a gamma ray interacting with an organic liquid scintillation detector used to detect and classify nuclear sources. Machine learning methods take several such examples and train a classifier to predict the label associated to future observations. My research involves developing novel data collection strategies and image reconstruction techniques for Magnetic Resonance Imaging. In order to accelerate data collection, we take advantage of features of MRI data, including sparsity, spatiotemporal correlations, and adherence to underlying physics; each of these properties can be leveraged to reduce the amount of data required to generate an image and thus speed up imaging time. We also seek to understand what image information is essential for radiologists in order to optimize MRI data collection and personalize the imaging protocol for each patient. We deploy machine learning algorithms and optimization techniques in each of these projects. In some of our work, we can generate the data that we need to train and test our algorithms using numerical simulations. In other portions, we seek to utilize clinical images, prospectively collected MRI data, or MRI protocol information in order to refine our techniques. We seek to develop technologies like cardiac Magnetic Resonance Fingerprinting (cMRF), which can be used to efficiently collect multiple forms of information to distinguish healthy and diseased tissue using MRI. By using rapid methods like cMRF, quantitative data describing disease processes can be gathered quickly, enabling more and sicker patients can be assessed via MRI. These data, collected from many patients over time, can also be used to further refine MRI technologies for the assessment of specific diseases in a tailored, patient-specific manner. My research in cognitive science takes a broad perspective on understanding human and artificial minds. How does content knowledge organization in memory (what we think) influence mental processes (how we think) to change outcomes in learning, problem solving, and creativity? Crossing traditional disciplinary boundaries, I offer novel contributions towards creating AI Experiences (AIX) centering the human in AI. My empirical findings on human cognitiion identify challenges in human cognition, including mental fixation during problem solving, convergent rather than divergent thinking processes in design and creativity, and the continued influence of (mis)information in memory during later reasoning. My research on HAI with Hari Subramonyam and others identifies how human thinking can be designed within artificial intelligence models to function as joint intelligence. Designs for AIX systems defined through cognitive processes offer improved ease of use and support communication of human intent, explainability, values, and desired outcomes Professor Seiford’s research interests are primarily in the areas of quality engineering, productivity analysis, process improvement, multiple-criteria decision making, and performance measurement. In addition, he is recognized as one of the world’s experts in the methodology of Data Envelopment Analysis. His current research involves the development of benchmarking models for identifying best-practice in manufacturing and service systems. He has written and co-authored four books and over one hundred articles in the areas of quality, productivity, operations management, process improvement, decision analysis, and decision support systems. I work in the area of robust control theory which focuses on the impact of model uncertainty on systems design. My research mainly focuses on the use of models for the design of control systems. This has applications to the design of autopilots on aircraft, the operation of wind turbines, and other engineered systems. The models are often developed from a combination of physical laws and data collected from the system. Uncertainty in the resulting model can propagate to a poorly design control algorithm leading to catastrophic effects for the engineered system. I develop theory and algorithms to analyze the impact of this model uncertainty and also design control algorithms that are robust, i.e. insensitive, to this uncertainty. What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? A canonical example of a feedback system is the cruise control on a car. The driver specifies the desired speed and this is compared to a measurement of the actual speed. The control algorithm is designed to modulate the engine throttle in response to the difference between the desired and measured speed. This is the basic feedback mechanism: react to the difference between the desired and measured system behavior. Feedback is pervasive in many systems to ensure reliable, safe, and repeatable operation. The field of control has historically relied on models of the physical system in order to design these feedback algorithms. Data has been used to identify the models but the full power of AI/ML techniques is still being explored in the field of control. I’m excited to explore how modern trends in data science can be used for the design of control algorithms. What are 1-3 interesting facts about yourself? 1. I have been a faculty in three different engineering departments: a) Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, b) Aerospace Engineering & Mechanics, and c) Electrical Engineering & Computer Science. I think this speaks to the generality of feedback control within engineering. 2. I worked at the Honeywell Labs from 2004-2008 and was part of the team that developed the flight control electronics for the Boeing 787 aircraft. 3. I ran and completed the Leadville 100 mile race. Dr. Sen is the Lee A Green Collegiate Research Professor at the University of Michigan. He holds research professor titles in the departments of Family Medicine and Biostatistics. He is a fellow of the American Statistical Association and an elected member of the International Statistical Institute. He has an established career record as a statistician with over 140 publications in peer-reviewed journals and invited book chapters. He has methodological expertise in the areas of competing risks, analysis of recurrent event data, and measuring inter-rater agreement. Dr. Sen has extensive collaborative experience in cancer prevention and biomarker research with diet and disease endpoints. He is the principal investigator of the Biostatistics Core in the NCI funded Specialized Program on Research Excellence in GI Cancer at the University of Michigan. He serves as the Book Review Editor for the journal International Statistical Review . He is on the editorial board of the journals Communications in Statistics , and Computational Statistics and Data Analysis , and serves as a statistics co-editor for the American Journal of Preventive Medicine . In the past, he has also served as an expert panelist for the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT), in the National Academy of Sciences. Srijan Sen, MD, PhD, is the Frances and Kenneth Eisenberg Professor of Depression and Neurosciences. Dr. Sen’s research focuses on the interactions between genes and the environment and their effect on stress, anxiety, and depression. He also has a particular interest in medical education, and leads a large multi-institution study that uses medical internship as a model of stress. Study of Pandemic Publishing: How Scholarly Literature is Affected by COVID-19 Pandemic This project addresses the quality of recently published COVID-19 publications. With the COVID-19 pandemic, researchers publish a lot their research as preprints. And while preprints are an important development in scholarly publishing, they are works in progress that need further refinement to become a more rigorous final product. Scholarly publishers are also taking initiatives to accelerate publication process, for example, by asking reviewers to curtail requests for additional experiments upon revisions. Sacrificing rigor for haste inevitably increases the likelihood of article correction and retraction, leading to spread of false information within supposedly trustworthy sources that have a peer-reviewing process in place to ensure proper verification. I study the quality of COVID-19 related scholarly works by using CADRE’s datasets to identify signs of incoherency, irreproducibility, and haste. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch, Fall 2021 Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Exploring Attention-based Deep Learning Methods for Improving Students’ Ability to Engage with Scientific Literature The overarching goal of my research is to develop innovative data science methodologies that enable responsive, optimal, and intelligent decision-making in manufacturing. My work focuses on three interconnected research thrusts: (1) online process control and non-destructive evaluation, (2) cost-effective, scalable, and generalizable machine learning, and (3) multi-modal data fusion. By integrating advanced data science tools with physical manufacturing knowledge, my research leverages diverse data sources, including sensor signals, images, and 3D point clouds, to address complex challenges in modern manufacturing. I have applied these methodologies to a broad spectrum of manufacturing applications, such as materials joining and assembly, additive manufacturing, two-photon lithography, machining, industrial drying, surface and 3D metrology, food processing, remanufacturing, and human-robot collaboration. The societal and industrial impacts of my work span multiple critical areas, including automotive, electrification and decarbonization, biomanufacturing, equity, rail, sustainability and energy, food, pulp and paper, and the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). The overarching goal of my research is to develop innovative data science methodologies that enable responsive, optimal, and intelligent decision-making in manufacturing. My work focuses on three interconnected research thrusts: (1) online process control and non-destructive evaluation, (2) cost-effective, scalable, and generalizable machine learning, and (3) multi-modal data fusion. By integrating advanced data science tools with physical manufacturing knowledge, my research leverages diverse data sources, including sensor signals, images, and 3D point clouds, to address complex challenges in modern manufacturing. I have applied these methodologies to a broad spectrum of manufacturing applications, such as materials joining and assembly, additive manufacturing, two-photon lithography, machining, industrial drying, surface and 3D metrology, food processing, remanufacturing, and human-robot collaboration. The societal and industrial impacts of my work span multiple critical areas, including automotive, electrification and decarbonization, biomanufacturing, equity, rail, sustainability and energy, food, pulp and paper, and the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). Prof. Shapiro is the Lawrence R. Klein Collegiate Professor of Economics, College of Literature, Science, and the Arts and Research Professor, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Shapiro’s general area of research is macroeconomics. He has studied investment and capital utilization, business-cycle fluctuations, consumption and saving, financial markets, monetary policy, fiscal policy, and time-series econometrics. Among his current research interests are consumption, saving, retirement, and portfolio choices of households, the effects of tax policy on investment, using surveys in macroeconomics, and improving the quality of national economic statistics. Dr. Shaw’s research program innovates around data and methods for prioritizing user-centered outcomes in transportation engineering and urban planning. She applies a range of analytical approaches (e.g., statistical matching, transfer learning) to: (1) address biases and other shortcomings present in active (e.g., survey data) and passive (e.g., GPS location data, marketing data, etc.) data; and (2) to integrate across passive and active data with the aim of expanding and improving the information available for planning and designing urban systems. On the methods side, her work brings advanced and under-utilized approaches from psychometrics (e.g., item response theory) and econometrics (e.g., decomposition approaches) to study and forecast infrastructure system user behavior. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: From ground to air, and the traveler experiences in-between: Human-centered data-driven performance measures for multimodal transportation systems Kerby Shedden has broad interests involving applied statistics, data science and computing with data.  Through his work directing the data science consulting service he has worked in a wide variety of application domains including numerous areas within health science, social science, and transportation research.  A current major focus is development of software tools that exploit high performance computing infrastructure for statistical analysis of health records, and sensor data from vehicles and road networks . Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Bayesian modeling of multi-source phenology to forecast airborne allergen concentration Siqian Shen is an Associate Professor of Industrial and Operations Engineering at the University of Michigan and also serves as an Associate Director in the Michigan Institute for Computational Discovery & Engineering (MICDE). Her theoretical research interests are in integer programming, stochastic/robust optimization, and network optimization. Applications include optimization and risk analysis of energy, healthcare, cloud-computing, and transportation systems. Her work has been supported by the National Science Foundation, Army Research Office, Department of Energy, and industrial funds. Her work has appeared in journals such as Management Science , Operations Research , Mathematical Programming , Manufacturing and Service Operations Management , INFORMS Journal on Computing , Transportation Research Part B , IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , and others. She is the recipient of the INFORMS Computing Society Best Student Paper award (runner-up), IIE Pritsker Doctoral Dissertation Award (1st Place), IBM Smarter Planet Innovation Faculty Award, and Department of Energy (DoE) Early Career Award. One of my research interests is in the digital diagnosis of material damage based on sensors, computational science and numerical analysis with large-scale 3D computed tomography data: (1) Establishment of a multi-resolution transformation rule of material defects. (2) Design of an accurate digital diagnosis method for material damage. (3) Reconstruction of defects in material domains from X-ray CT data . (4) Parallel computation of materials damage. My team also conducted a series of studies for improving the quality of large-scale laser scanning data in reverse engineering and industrial inspection: (1) Detection and removal of non-isolated Outlier Data Clusters (2) Accurate correction of surface data noise of polygonal meshes (3) Denoising of two-dimensional geometric discontinuities. Another research focus is on the information fusion of large-scale data from autonomous driving. Our research is funded by China Natural Science Foundation with focus on (1) laser-based perception in degraded visual environment, (2) 3D pattern recognition with dynamic, incomplete, noisy point clouds, (3) real-time image processing algorithms in degraded visual environment, and (4) brain-computer interface to predict the state of drivers. Processing and Analysis of 3D Large-Scale Engineering Data My research interest is in Biomedical AI, which lies in the interdisciplinary areas of machine learning, computer vision, signal and image processing, medical image analysis, biomedical imaging, and data science. I am particularly interested in developing efficient and reliable AI/ML-driven computational methods for biomedical imaging and informatics to tackle real-world biomedicine and healthcare problems, including but not limited to, personalized cancer treatment, and precision medicine. In the field of AI/ML, we focus on developing reliable, generalizable, data-efficient machine learning and deep learning algorithms by exploiting prior knowledge from the physical world, such as: Prior-integrated learning for data-efficient ML Uncertainty awareness for trustworthy ML. In the field of Biomedicine, we focus on developing efficient computational methods for biomedical imaging and biomedical data analysis to advance precision medicine and personalized treatment, such as: Multi-modal data analysis for decision making Clinical trial translation for real-world deployment. What are some of your most interesting projects? Our goal is to develop efficient and reliable AI/ML-driven computational methods for biomedical imaging and informatics to tackle real-world biomedicine and healthcare problems. We hope the technology advancement in AI and ML can help us to better understand human health in different levels. Specifically, we develop Biomedical AI in different parts, including: – AI in Biomedical Imaging: develop novel machine learning algorithms to advance biomedical imaging techniques for obtaining computational images with improved quality. Specifically, relevant topics include but not limited to: Implicit neural representation learning; Diffusion model / Score-based generative model; Physics-aware / Geometry-informed deep learning. – AI in Biomedical Image Processing and Bioinformatics: develop robust and efficient machine learning algorithms to extract useful information from multimodal biomedical data for assisting decision making and precision medicine. Specifically, relevant topics include but not limited to: Multimodal representation learning; Robust learning with missing data / noisy labeling; Data-efficient learning such as self- / un- / semi-supervised learning with limited data / labels. How did you end up where you are today? I am an assistant professor in the ECE Division of the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science department of the College of Engineering, University of Michigan – Ann Arbor. Before this, I received my Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University. I obtained her Bachelor’s degree in Electronic Engineering from Tsinghua University in 2016. I is the recipient of Stanford Bio-X Bowes Graduate Student Fellowship (2019-2022), and was selected as the Rising Star in EECS by MIT and the Rising Star in Data Science by The University of Chicago in 2021. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Interpretable machine learning to identify tumor spatial features from longitudinal multi-modality images for personalized progression risk prediction of poor prognosis head and neck cancer My group is interested in the discovery and characterization of natural product molecules for pharmaceutical development. Our pipeline relating to data science begins with microbial genome sequencing, mining of natural product biosynthetic gene clusters, integration of LC-MS/MS, and biological activity data. A major challenge in the field of natural product sciences is to 3-dimensional structures of complex metabolites based on genome sequencing data. Advancing this challenge will provide access to millions of new chemical structures with potential important disease fighting activities derived from cheap, rapid, next-gen sequencing technologies. Moreover, accurate prediction of complex natural product structures from genome sequencing data would then allow virtual screening of compounds against important disease targets (e.g. ribosomes, kinases, receptors) to begin the drug discovery process. It would also enable virtual medicinal chemistry to optimize molecules for disease target binding and optimal bioavailability and pharmacokinetic properties. My methodological research focus on developing statistical methods for routinely collected healthcare databases such as electronic health records (EHR) and claims data. I aim to tackle the unique challenges that arise from the secondary use of real-world data for research purposes. Specifically, I develop novel causal inference methods and semiparametric efficiency theory that harness the full potential of EHR data to address comparative effectiveness and safety questions. I develop scalable and automated pipelines for curation and harmonization of EHR data across healthcare systems and coding systems. Cong Shi is an associate professor in the Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering at the University of Michigan College of Engineering. His primary research interest lies in developing efficient and provably-good data-driven algorithms for operations management models, including supply chain management, revenue management, service operations, and human-robot interactions. He received his Ph.D. in Operations Research at MIT in 2012, and his B.S. in Mathematics from the National University of Singapore in 2007. My research is focused on the human biometric data (such as motion) to guide the design and manufacturing of assistive and proactive devices. Embedded and external sensors generate ample data which require scientific approaches to analyze and create knowledge. I have worked closely with the University of Michigan Orthotics and Prosthetics Center in the design and manufacturing of custom assistive devices using 3D-printing and cyber-based design. The goal is to create a cyber-physical system that can acquire the data from scanning, sensors, human motion, user feedback, clinician diagnosis into quantitative health metrics and guidelines to improve the quality of care for people with needs. Yuki Shiraito works primarily in the field of political methodology. His research interests center on the development and applications of Bayesian statistical models and large-scale computational algorithms for data analysis. He has applied these quantitative methods to political science research including a survey experiment on public support for conflicting parties in civil war, heterogeneous effects of indiscriminate state violence, and the detection of text diffusion among a large set of legislative bills. After completing his undergraduate education at the University of Tokyo, Yuki received his Ph.D. in Politics (2017) from Princeton University. Before joining the University of Michigan as an Assistant Professor in September 2018, he served as a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Program of Quantitative Social Science at Dartmouth College. The Shultz group uses data science methods in two primary ways 1) to investigate student placement in introductory chemistry courses and 2) to analyze student texts to provide instructors actionable intelligence about student learning. Using regression discontinuity we investigated the impact of taking general chemistry prior to organic chemistry on student performance and persistence in later chemistry courses and found that students who took general chemistry first benefitted by 1/4 of a letter grade but were no more likely to persist. A continued investigation using survey and interview methods indicated that this was related to academic skills rather than content preparation. Through the MWrite project we have collected a large corpus of student texts and are developing automated text analysis methods to glean information about student learning across disciplines, with specific focus on scientific reasoning. Network representation of writing moves made by students in argumentative writing with relevant transition probabilities. The size of the node represents the relative frequency of operation use and the edge labels represent the transition probability with key transitions highlighted in orange. My research lies in cutting-edge methodology development in streams of Bayesian statistics, complex survey inference, missing data imputation, causal inference, and data confidentiality protection. I have extensive collaboration experiences with health services researchers and epidemiologists to improve healthcare and public health practice, and have been providing statistical support to solve sampling and analysis issues on health and social science surveys. Age- and sensory-related deficits in balance function drastically impact quality of life and present long-term care challenges. Successful fall prevention programs include balance exercise regimes, designed to recover, retrain, or develop new sensorimotor strategies to facilitate functional mobility. Effective balance-training programs require frequent visits to the clinic and/or the supervision of a physical therapist; however, one-on-one guided training with a physical therapist is not scalable for long-term balance training preventative and therapeutic programs. To enable preventative and therapeutic at-home balance training, we aim to develop models for automatically 1) evaluating balance and, 2) delivering personalized training guidance for community dwelling OA and people with sensory disabilities. Smart Phone Balance Trainer Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Machine Learning Augmented System for Continuous Fetal Monitoring My research focuses on quantitative social research methodology, and I use machine learning to identify bias in social science data, especially due to measurement and nonresponse error, and to process unstructured data. I also use LLMs for the classification of text data, and explore strategies to use AI in questionnaire design. I first started to study engineering, but while I enjoyed the math component of the program, my interest was in learning about how our society works. Thus, I changed the field to social sciences and humanities, while still keeping my enthusiasm for statistics. As a quantitative social scientist I can now follow both of my passions at the same time, statistics and social research. Data science and AI offer new amazing possibilities for social science research to discover, analyze and combine otherwise not available data and improve social science methodology. They also offer new opportunities of interdisciplinary collaboration (e.g., between social science and computer science), which are more likely to result in break-through discoveries. In two projects with colleagues from Germany and Canada, we used LLMs to classify open-ended answers in surveys to better understand reasons why people are willing or not willing to share additional data (e.g., web-paradata, social media data, health data data, geo-location data) within a survey. We discovered interesting patterns regarding privacy and trust, which will use to inform future data collections. Something interesting about myself- I started to play chess at the age of six, and I’m still a passionate player. Playing international tournaments allowed me to make friends around the world. Most of my research related to data science involves decision making around clinical trials. In particular, I am interested in how databases of past clinical trial results can inform future trial design and other decisions. Some of my work has involved using machine learning and mathematical optimization to design new combination therapies for cancer based on the results of past trials. Other work has used network meta-analysis to combine the results of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to better summarize what is currently known about a disease, to design further trials that would be maximally informative, and to study the quality of the control arms used in Phase III trials (which are used for drug approvals). Other work combines toxicity data from clinical trials with toxicity data from other data sources (claims data and adverse event reporting databases) to accelerate detection of adverse drug reactions to newly approved drugs. Lastly, some of my work uses Bayesian inference to accelerate clinical trials with multiple endpoints, learning the link between different endpoints using past clinical trial results. Mehrdad Simkani, PhD, is Professor of Mathematics, College of Arts and Sciences, at the University of Michigan, Flint. Prof. Simkani’s current research is in the area of rational approximation in the complex domain. For example, he investigates the convergence of rational function series on the extended complex plane. Application of machine learning and artificial intelligence in healthcare, particularly in the field of pulmonary and critical care medicine. Deep learning applied to radiologic imaging studies. Physician and artificial intelligence interactions and collaborations. Identifying and addressing algorithmic bias. Accomplishments and Awards AI guardrails can fall short in health care: study Dr. Skifstad’s focus is on tracking the evolving impact of AI on business models, the entrepreneurial ecosystem, and innovation. He was one of the first PhDs to graduate from the U-M Artificial Intelligence Lab. The first 30 years of his career were spent running venture capital-backed software companies. My research spans robotics, computer vision, and machine learning with a focus on enabling autonomy in dynamic, unstructured, or remote environments across field robotics applications (air, land, sea, and space). In particular, my group focuses on problems that rely on limited labeled data. The Smith lab group is primarily interested in examining evolutionary processes using new data sources and analysis techniques. We develop new methods to address questions about the rates and modes of evolution using the large data sources that have become more common in the biological disciplines over the last ten years. In particular, we use DNA sequence data to construct phylogenetic trees and conduct additional analyses about processes of evolution on these trees. In addition to this research program, we also address how new data sources can facilitate new research in evolutionary biology. To this end, we sequence transcriptomes, primarily in plants, with the goal of better understanding where, within the genome and within the phylogeny, processes like gene duplication and loss, horizontal gene transfer, and increased rates of molecular evolution occur. A rough draft of the first comprehensive tree of life, showing the links between all of the more than 2.3 million named species of animals, plants and microorganisms. The draft was constructed by combining more than 450 existing trees to a comprehensive taxonomy. Because the tree is large, only lineages with at least 500 species are shown. The colors correspond to the amount of publicly available DNA data for each lineage (red = high, blue = low, giving an idea of the amount of available information). Accomplishments and Awards 2022 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Unlocking the vault: machine learning methods for the mobilization of data from millions of plant images I work in algebraic geometry, especially over finite fields. The set of points on an algebraic variety over particular subfields forms an interesting sequence of data sets. Studying it may, I hope, unlock some secrets of algebraic curves or surfaces or higher dimensional objects. I am also interested in connecting statistical forms of AI (machine learning, large language models) with symbolic deductive reasoning (“proof-checkers” like Lean or Coq). My research centers on ethics and communication in engineering contexts, particularly related to community-engaged design of energy systems. I’m interested in developing methods for ethically engaging community members in the engineering design process to create equitable, sustainable products and processes for a shared common good. Musculoskeletal Ultrasound Detection and Mechanistic Evaluations of a Type 2 Diabetes (T2D)- and Prediabetes (PreD)-Related Skeletal Muscle Abnormality. This research interest originated during my fellowship in MSK radiology in 2009. I hypothesized that increased skeletal muscle echo intensity (hyperechoic) observed in PreD and early T2D could serve as a simple, noninvasive, nonionizing, and inexpensive imaging biomarker for early detection of insulin resistance, decreased lean muscle mass, and muscle dysfunction. In 2017, as the PI, I initiated a retrospective study to evaluate this skeletal muscle US abnormality. The resulting abstract was accepted at the RSNA Annual Meeting in 2018 and chosen for its media press release, leading to international media coverage. This included a formal interview aired on local NBC news in December 2018. Furthermore, a resulting publication in the Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine became the most downloaded article in 2018-2019, reinforcing the scientific and public interest in this skeletal muscle abnormality. Following this success, I began another study as PI to objectively evaluate this sonographic abnormality using a quantitative US method. This resulted in a publication in BMC Endocrine Disorders. Ongoing studies include a recent 1-year NIH R56 DK133298 grant, entitled "Early Type 2 Diabetes Detection with AI-Analysis of Skeletal Muscle Ultrasound and Mechanistic Evaluations" and a recent publication: Khan S, Klochko CL, Cooper S, Franz B, Wolf L, Alessio A, Soliman SB. Skeletal Muscle Ultrasound Radiomics and Machine Learning for the Earlier Detection of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. J Med Ultrasound. 26 June 2024. doi: 10.4103/jmu.jmu_12_24. Additional preliminary studies in both human subjects and murine models with histologic analyses reinforce our hypothesis that this abnormality signifies developing insulin resistance, lower muscle mass, and muscle dysfunction, as a harbinger of T2D. Expanding our understanding of the factors in skeletal muscle that underlie elevated muscle echo intensity could help optimize treatments to prevent or treat this abnormality, leading to better patient outcomes. Globally, an astounding 232 million people, or 50% of those with T2D, and 438 million people, or 81% of those with PreD, are unaware and undiagnosed. In the United States alone, a staggering 8.5 million individuals with T2D and a vast 88.2 million individuals, or 90% of those with PreD, are undiagnosed. This affects nearly one-third of the U.S. population with a disproportionate impact on underserved, underrepresented, and lower socioeconomic communities, which make up 79% of the T2D population. Furthermore, when T2D is finally detected, approximately half of the patients already suffer from one or more irreversible complications, contributing to an economic burden of at least $413 billion in the U.S. and $966 billion globally. Early noninvasive detection using an AI/ML based method, leveraging skeletal muscle as a biomarker, could halt or delay disease progression, reduce irreversible complications, and help mitigate this substantial economic burden. I received my second PhD in Computer Science (with a focus on distributed systems and software engineering) from Virginia Tech USA in 2020, and the first PhD (with a focus on wireless networking and mobile computing) from Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications China in 2015. I received the Best Paper Award from IEEE International Conference on Edge Computing in 2019. My ongoing research projects include measuring the data quality of web services and using federated learning to improve indoor localization accuracy. My research interests lie in two major fields: In the field of statistical methodology, my interests include data integration, distributed inference, federated learning and meta learning, high-dimensional statistics, mixed integer optimization, statistical machine learning, and spatiotemporal modeling. In the field of empirical study, my interests include bioinformatics, biological aging, epigenetics, environmental health sciences, nephrology, nutritional sciences, obesity, and statistical genetics. S. Sriram, PhD, is Professor of Marketing in the University of Michigan Ross School of Business, Ann Arbor. Prof. Sriram’s research interests are in the areas of brand and product portfolio management, multi-sided platforms, healthcare policy, and online education. His research uses state of the art econometric methods to answer important managerial and policy-relevant questions. He has studied topics such as measuring and tracking brand equity and optimal allocation of resources to maintain long-term brand profitability, cannibalization, consumer adoption of technology products, and strategies for multi-sided platforms. Substantively, his research has spanned several industries including consumer packaged goods, technology products and services, retailing, news media, the interface of healthcare and marketing, and MOOCs. My research broadly revolves around extending, specializing, and developing novel ML/AI methods for computational mechanics. My primary focus is data-driven physics-based modeling that utilizes approaches like Variational System Identification and PDE-constrained optimization. I apply these methods for inferring PDE models for complex physical phenomena, for instance, foldings during brain growth, deformation mechanics in soft matter (human tissue and ligaments), and migration and proliferation in biological cells. I also develop graph-based approaches for Machine Learning and NISQ (Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum) computing. These methods are rooted in classical physics and mathematical analysis but simultaneously developed in concert with real-life experimental data. Prof. Stange’s research uses population administrative education and labor market data to understand, evaluate and improve education, employment, and economic policy. Much of the work involves analyzing millions of course-taking and transcript records for college students, whether they be at a single institution, a handful of institutions, or all institutions in several states. This data is used to richly characterize the experiences of college students and relate these experiences to outcomes such as educational attainment, employment, earnings, and career trajectories. Several projects also involve working with the text contained in the universe of all job ads posted online in the US for the past decade. This data is used to characterize the demand for different skills and education credentials in the US labor market. Classification is a task that is arising frequently in this work: How to classify courses into groups based on their title and content? How to identify students with similar educational experiences based on their course-taking patterns? How to classify job ads as being more appropriate for one type of college major or another? This data science work is often paired with traditional causal inference tools of economics, including quasi-experimental methods. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Classifying the Content of Undergraduate Course-taking at Scale Bridge Michigan Opinion | Getting free college right UMich students, faculty react to Whitmer’s 2024 State of the State – The Michigan Daily Energy Transportation related topics: data and simulations of various cleaner and ultimately cost-effective options for transit. exploring techno-economic and environmental issues in electric ride-sharing/hailing vehicles to create clean and convenient alternatives to single-occupancy vehicles. investigation of the location and integration of chargers with energy storage and bi-directional services, along with the connection to distributed renewable power generation such as solar arrays as well as the centralized electric grid. Powertrain related topics: measurements, models and management of batteries, fuel cells, and engines in automotive and stationary applications. As a board-certified ophthalmologist and glaucoma specialist, I have more than 15 years of clinical experience caring for patients with different types and complexities of glaucoma. In addition to my clinical experience, as a health services researcher, I have developed experience and expertise in several disciplines including performing analyses using large health care claims databases to study utilization and outcomes of patients with ocular diseases, racial and other disparities in eye care, associations between systemic conditions or medication use and ocular diseases. I have learned the nuances of various data sources and ways to maximize our use of these data sources to answer important and timely questions. Leveraging my background in HSR with new skills in bioinformatics and precision medicine, over the past 2-3 years I have been developing and growing the Sight Outcomes Research Collaborative (SOURCE) repository, a powerful tool that researchers can tap into to study patients with ocular diseases. My team and I have spent countless hours devising ways of extracting electronic health record data from Clarity, cleaning and de-identifying the data, and making it linkable to ocular diagnostic test data (OCT, HVF, biometry) and non-clinical data. Now that we have successfully developed such a resource here at Kellogg, I am now collaborating with colleagues at > 2 dozen academic ophthalmology departments across the country to assist them with extracting their data in the same format and sending it to Kellogg so that we can pool the data and make it accessible to researchers at all of the participating centers for research and quality improvement studies. I am also actively exploring ways to integrate data from SOURCE into deep learning and artificial intelligence algorithms, making use of SOURCE data for genotype-phenotype association studies and development of polygenic risk scores for common ocular diseases, capturing patient-reported outcome data for the majority of eye care recipients, enhancing visualization of the data on easy-to-access dashboards to aid in quality improvement initiatives, and making use of the data to enhance quality of care, safety, efficiency of care delivery, and to improve clinical operations. . Our lab is dedicated to understanding the complex choreography of cells as they organize during early animal development, giving rise to diverse organ morphologies. We achieve these through genetic manipulation, advanced microscopy, and computational data analysis, in two different model systems: the mouse skeletal system, and the early fruit fly embryo. Most of our work involves analyzing high-resolution live microscopy data, or “biological movies,” which capture developing tissues in remarkable detail. This level of visual complexity exceeds our ability to analyze with the naked eye. To overcome this challenge, we develop advanced image processing and machine learning algorithms that can sift through the data, identify biologically interesting events, summarize them, and visualize them in a variety of ways. One of our major goals is to create algorithms capable of reconstructing the complete cell lineage tree of the early fruit fly embryo. Dr. Stidham is an academic gastroenterologist specializing in medical image analysis in Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), and gastroenterology conditions at large. His research is focused on developing new measures of disease activity to power automated care models and clinical decision support systems in IBD with a focus on medical image analysis and new technology development. His work has focused on automation of existing IBD disease measures that relying on colonoscopy, CT, MRI, and ultrasound using neural networks and novel image analysis approaches. Dr. Stidham is also developing new measures of disease activity, inflammation, and fibrosis that leverage advances in image segmentation, transfer learning, signals analysis, and fuzzy network approaches as well as collaborating for development of new image acquisition modalities. Finally, his team has active projects in collaboration with the Department of Learning Health Sciences for merging data from clinical office notes with imaging data using computational linguistics approaches. His work has been supported by the NIH, DOD, NSF, and several large investigator-initiated industry collaborations. Accomplishments and Awards AI Transforming Medicine: Insights from GI to Dermatology Stilian Stoev’s research is in the area of applied probability and statistics for stochastic processes with emphasis on extremes, heavy tails, self-similarity, and long-range dependence. His recent theoretical contributions are in the area of max-stable processes, which is the class of processes emerging as a canonical model for the dependence in the extremes. This includes the representation, characterization, ergodicity, mixing, and prediction for this class of processes. Dr. Stoev is also working on applied problems in the area of computer network traffic monitoring, analysis and modeling. A recent joint project focuses on developing efficient statistical methods and algorithms for the visualization and analysis of fast multi-gigabit network traffic streams, which can help unveil the structure of traffic flows, detect anomalies and cyber attacks in real-time. This involves advanced low-level packet capture, efficient computation and rapid communication of summary statistics using non-relational data bases. More broadly, Dr. Stoev’s research is motivated by large-scale and data intensive applied problems arising in the areas of: environmental, weather and climate extremes. insurance and finance. Internet traffic monitoring, modeling and prediction. Hash-binned array of 10+Gbps traffic stream measured at Merit Network. Bin (i,j) corresponds to traffic intensity in bytes of the data transferred from source IPs hashed in bin i with corresponding destination IPs hashed in bin j. The picture corresponds to a 10 second aggregation period. Bright horizontal lines indicate server-type communication from one bin to many, while unusual vertical lines are indicative of distributed denial of service (DDoS) type many-to-one attacks. The data were obtained using the PF_RING module in zero-copy mode, which by-passes the OS kernel and processes all packets passing through the interface. These and related statistical summaries derived via a recently developed AMON (All packet MONintoring) framework allows for a near-instantaneous visualization and automatic detection of structural changes in the network traffic conditions. I am a mathematical and computational scientist whose primary interests lie at the intersection of quantum many-body physics and machine learning (ML). The aims of my research are twofold: 1. leverage the huge success of ML in high-dimensional learning tasks to efficiently solve quantum many-body problems and 2. develop impactful scientific computing tools using quantum many-body technology as a resource. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Neural Quantum States at Scale: Applications in Sciences and Engineering. I primarily work on developing scalable parallel algorithms to solve large scientific problems. This has been done with teams from several different disciplines and application areas. I’m most concerned with algorithms emphasizing in-memory approaches. Another area of research has developed serial algorithms for nonparametric regression. This is a flexible form of regression that only assumes a general shape, such as upward, rather than a parametric form such as linear. It can be applied to a range of learning and classification problems, such as taxonomy trees. I also work some in adaptive learning, designing efficient sampling procedures. Martin J. Strauss, PhD, is Professor of Mathematics, College of Literature, Science, and the Arts and Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, College of Engineering, in the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Strauss’ interests include randomized approximation algorithms for massive data sets, including, specifically, sublinear-time algorithms for sparse recovery in the Fourier and other domains.  Other interests include data privacy, including privacy of energy usage data. In the next-generation power systems (Smart Grid), a large number of distributed energy devices (e.g., distributed generators, distributed energy storage, loads, smart meters) are connected to each other in an internet-like structure. Incorporating millions of new energy devices will require wide-ranging transformation of the nation’s aging electrical grid infrastructure. The key challenge is to efficiently manage a great amount of devices through distributed intelligence. The distributed grid intelligence (DGI) agent is the brain of distributed energy devices. DGI enables every single energy device to not only have a certain intelligence to achieve optimal management locally, but also coordinate with others to achieve a common goal. The massive volume of real-time data collected by DGI will help the grid operators gain a better understanding of a large-scale and highly dynamic power systems. In conventional power systems, the system operation is performed using purely centralized data storage and processing approaches. However, as the number of DGIs increases to more than hundreds of thousands, it is rather intuitive that the state-of-the-art centralized information processing architecture will no longer be sustainable under such big data explosion. The ongoing research work illustrates how advanced ideas from IT industry and power industry can be combined in a unique way. The proposed high-availability distributed file system and data processing framework can be easily tailored to support other data-intensive applications in a large-scale and complex power grids. For example, the proposed DGI nodes can be embedded into any distributed generators (e.g., roof-top PV panel), distributed energy storage devices (e.g., electric vehicle), and loads (e.g., smart home) in a future residential distribution system. If implemented successfully, we can translate Smart Grid with high-volume, high-velocity, and high-variety data to a completely distributed cyber-physical system architecture. In addition, the proposed work can be easily extended to support other cyber-physical system applications (e.g., intelligent transportation system). Big Data Applications in Power Systems Professor Subramanian is interested in a variety of stochastic modeling, decision and control theoretic, and applied probability questions concerned with networks. Examples include analysis of random graphs, analysis of processes like cascades on random graphs, network economics, analysis of e-commerce systems, mean-field games, network games, telecommunication networks, load-balancing in large server farms, and information assimilation, aggregation and flow in networks especially with strategic users. Yuekai Sun, PhD, is Assistant Professor in the department of Statistics at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Dr. Sun’s research is motivated by the challenges of analyzing massive data sets in data-driven science and engineering. I focus on statistical methodology for high-dimensional problems; i.e. problems where the number of unknown parameters is comparable to or exceeds the sample size. My recent work focuses on two problems that arise in learning from high-dimensional data (versus black-box approaches that do not yield insights into the underlying data-generation process). They are: 1. model selection and post-selection inference: discover the latent low-dimensional structure in high-dimensional data and perform inference on the learned structure; 2. distributed statistical computing: design scalable estimators and algorithms that avoid communication and minimize “passes” over the data. A recurring theme in my work is exploiting the geometry of latent low-dimensional structure for statistical and computational gains. More broadly, I am interested in the geometric aspects of high-dimensional data analysis. A visualization of an algorithm for making accurate recommendations from data that contain shared user accounts. My areas of interest are control, estimation, and optimization, with applications to energy systems in transportation, automotive, and marine domains. My group develops model-based and data-driven tools to explore underlying system dynamics and understand the operational environments. We develop computational frameworks and numerical algorithms to achieve real-time optimization and explore connectivity and data analytics to reduce uncertainties and improve performance through predictive control and planning. We are interested in resolving outstanding fundamental scientific problems that impede the computational materials design process. Our group uses high-throughput density functional theory, applied thermodynamics, and materials informatics to deepen our fundamental understanding of synthesis-structure-property relationships, while exploring new chemical spaces for functional technological materials. These research interests are driven by the practical goal of the U.S. Materials Genome Initiative to accelerate materials discovery, but whose resolution requires basic fundamental research in synthesis science, inorganic chemistry, and materials thermodynamics. Accomplishments and Awards ‘Dolomite Problem’: 200-year-old geology mystery resolved Better battery manufacturing: Robotic lab vets new reaction design strategy 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Machine-Processing of Graduate Student Applications for Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Uncertainty quantification and decision making are increasingly demanded with the development of future technology in engineering and transportation systems. Among the uncertainty quantification problems, Dr. Wenbo Sun is particularly interested in statistical modelling of engineering system responses with considering the high dimensionality and complicated correlation structure, as well as quantifying the uncertainty from a variety of sources simultaneously, such as the inexactness of large-scale computer experiments, process variations, and measurement noises. He is also interested in data-driven decision making that is robust to the uncertainty. Specifically, he delivers methodologies for anomaly detection and system design optimization, which can be applied to manufacturing process monitoring, distracted driving detection, out-of-distribution object identification, vehicle safety design optimization, etc. Veera Sundararaghavan is a Professor of Aerospace Engineering at the University of Michigan – Ann Arbor and the director of Multiscale Structural Simulations Laboratory. His research is on multi-length scale computational techniques for modelling and design of aerospace materials with a focus on microstructural mechanics (crystal plasticity, homogenization) and molecular simulation. He is particularly interested in new computational techniques that can revolutionize the way we compute in materials science: machine learning and quantum computing algorithms. He has made important contributions in the area of integrated computational materials engineering (ICME) including reduced order representations for microstructure-process-property relationships, Markov random fields approach for microstructure reconstruction, and parallel, multiscale algorithms for optimizing deformation, fatigue, failure and oxidation response in polycrystalline alloys, high temperature ceramic matrix composites and energetic composites. Methods of choice for data science include deep Boltzmann machines, undirected graph models (Markov random fields) and Support vector machines. An illustration of the hybrid Quantum-Classical computation technique: Quantum Annealer is used as a Boltzmann sampler while the gradient optimization is carried out using classical computation Z. Tuba Suzer Gurtekin is an Assistant Research Scientist at the University of Michigan’s Institute for Social Research. Her research includes managing monthly surveys of consumer attitudes, expectations and behavior. Her published research focuses on methods to quantify nonresponse and measurement survey errors in probability and nonprobability sample surveys, and mixed-mode survey design and inference. Her research experience has included development of alternative sample, methodology and questionnaire designs, data collection and analysis methods for a general population in parallel survey modes. She also teaches Survey Sampling for Clinical Research at the University of Michigan’s Clinical Research Design and Statistical Analysis program (OJOC CRDSA). Dr. Suzuki is a behavioral scientist and has major research interests in examining and intervening mediational social determinants factors of health behaviors and health outcomes across lifespan. She analyzes the National Health Interview Survey, Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey as well as the Flint regional medical records to understand the factors associating with poor health outcomes among people with disabilities including children and aging. Most of my current work is in social and political philosophy of language and metaethics. It pays special attention to relationships between language, context, and ideology, to the particularities of speech situations, and to the norms governing language use. I’m especially interested in how the force of language can go beyond the information that is apparent to or shared amongst discourse participants. Recently I’ve been thinking about how the above makes trouble (a.k.a. interesting but sometimes scary new things to think about) for work on artificial intelligence, artificial general intelligence, and automated content moderation and promotion. I have continuing interests in the interfaces between language and epistemology (epistemic modals and conditionals), language and metaphysics (causal talk and the logic of causation), language and ethics (deontic modals), and on two frameworks for linguistic theorizing that bear on the above—‘constraint semantics’ and ‘ordering super­valua­tionism.’ Additional Information What are some of your most interesting projects? One of my recent papers argues that not saying a particular thing can generate a conversational implicature — a means of conveying a message without explicitly committing oneself to that message. Debates about such ‘omissive implicatures’ are especially common in online language use. How did you end up where you are today? What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? Contemporary work in AI interacts with countless interesting and pressing philosophical questions. What are 1-3 interesting facts about yourself? The Sztain research group is broadly focused on computer-aided molecular design, intersecting fields of chemistry, physics, biology, and computer science. Ongoing projects involve integrating experimental data and enhanced sampling molecular dynamics simulations to improve computational models for allosteric inhibitor design and protein engineering. I work on the analysis of sports as they relate to economics, business, finance, history, performance modeling, analytics and prediction/forecasting. I typically use panel data econometric techniques to understand team performance in professional sports. I also have interest in forecast models. Accomplishments and Awards Black coaches are rare in soccer. Is this because of a lack of diversity in the boardroom? I am a research faculty at the Computer Science and Engineering department at University of Michigan. I work with a group of talented PhD students on computer architecture, compiler techniques, and software engineering. My group focuses on developing novel software and hardware solutions to optimize large-scale data intensive worklods (e.g., graph traversals). I earned my PhD degree in CSE from University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA, master’s degree in EE from Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, and an undergraduate degree in EEE from BITS Pilani, Goa Campus, Goa, India. I am an applied statistician working on statistical machine learning methods for analyzing complex biomedical data sets. I develop multivariate statistical methods such as probabilistic graphical models, cluster analysis, discriminant analysis, and dimension reduction to uncover patterns from massive data set. Recently, I also work on topics related to robust statistics, non-convex optimization, and data integration from multiple sources. Jeremy Taylor, PhD, is the Pharmacia Research Professor of Biostatistics in the School of Public Health and Professor in the Department of Radiation Oncology in the School of Medicine at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. He is the director of the University of Michigan Cancer Center Biostatistics Unit and director of the Cancer/Biostatistics training program. He received his B.A. in Mathematics from Cambridge University and his Ph.D. in Statistics from UC Berkeley. He was on the faculty at UCLA from 1983 to 1998, when he moved to the University of Michigan. He has had visiting positions at the Medical Research Council, Cambridge, England; the University of Adelaide; INSERM, Bordeaux and CSIRO, Sydney, Australia. He is a previously winner of the Mortimer Spiegelman Award from the American Public Health Association and the Michael Fry Award from the Radiation Research Society. He has worked in various areas of Statistics and Biostatistics, including Box-Cox transformations, longitudinal and survival analysis, cure models, missing data, smoothing methods, clinical trial design, surrogate and auxiliary variables. He has been heavily involved in collaborations in the areas of radiation oncology, cancer research and bioinformatics. I have broad interests and expertise in developing statistical methodology and applying it in biomedical research, particularly in cancer research. I have undertaken research  in power transformations, longitudinal modeling, survival analysis particularly cure models, missing data methods, causal inference and in modeling radiation oncology related data.  Recent interests, specifically related to cancer, are in statistical methods for genomic data, statistical methods for evaluating cancer biomarkers, surrogate endpoints, phase I trial design, statistical methods for personalized medicine and prognostic and predictive model validation.  I strive to develop principled methods that will lead to valid interpretations of the complex data that is collected in biomedical research. STEPHAN F. TAYLOR is a professor of psychiatry and Associate Chair for Research and Research Regulatory Affairs in the Department of Psychiatry; and an adjunct professor of psychology. His work uses brain mapping and brain stimulation to study and treat serious mental disorders such as psychosis, refractory depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Data science techniques area applied in the analysis of high dimensional functional magnetic resonance imaging datasets and meso-scale brain networks, using supervised and unsupervised techniques to interrogate brain-behavior correlations relevant for psychopathological conditions. Clinical-translation work with brain stimulation, primarily with transcranial magnetic stimulation, is informed by mapping meso-scale networks to guide treatment of conditions such as depression. Future work seeks to use machine learning to identify treatment predictors and match individual patients to specific treatments. My research is at the intersection of Science of Science + Sociology of Organizations + Computational Social Science. I study how social and organizational factors affect scientific discovery. I am especially interested in evaluation practices in science, and whether they promote or stifle innovation. My approach relies primarily on field experiments — interventions in scientific competitions and other settings — and applying computational tools to large-scale observational data. Current research projects include: 1. Cumulative advantage in science: Do metrics like citation counts and impact factors proxy quality and influence, or help create them? 2. Biases in expert evaluation: Do groups of experts make decisions differently from individuals? 3. Science and the media: What research is picked up by the media, and how is it covered? Showing how often a paper has been cited causes scientists to perceive it as of lower quality, unless that paper is among the 10% most highly cited. Accomplishments and Awards Researchers with African and East Asian names are less likely to be mentioned in U.S. media A simulation-based analysis of the impact of rhetorical citations in science My research focuses on leveraging language models to enable concurrent, embedded and transformative assessment processes for learners and their educational journeys. Traditional assessment approaches are primarily summative, placing students in high-pressure exam situations that may not accurately reflect their abilities or learning progression. These assessments tend to follow a “one size fits all” model, neglecting the diverse needs and backgrounds of individual learners. Consequently, such approaches can contribute to educational inequities, diminish student motivation, overlook diversity, and offer insufficient feedback for guiding further learning. There’s a pressing need for a system that supports personalized formative assessment, promotes continuous educational growth, and remains scalable and efficient. In contrast, the systems I develop create “bespoke assessments” tailored to each student’s unique educational context — considering their background, experiences, and current level of understanding. By providing real-time, relevant, and personalized feedback, these systems facilitate more accurate and supportive evaluation of student learning. My research lies at the confluence of learning sciences, data science, and social learning, with a strong emphasis on design-based implementation. I focus on designing and deploying advanced educational technologies that enhance and support student learning experiences. I develop probabilistic and statistical models to analyze genetic and genomic data. We use these methods to study evolution, natural selection, and human history. Recently, I have been interested in applying these techniques to study viral epidemics (e.g., HIV) and cancer. Estimates of recent effective population sizes for various human subpopulations. My research group is engaged in fundamental research in the following areas: Statistical learning theory: We are developing theory and algorithms for predictions problems (e.g., learning to rank and multilabel learning) with complex label spaces and where the available human supervision is often weak. Sequential prediction in a game theoretic framework: We are trying to understand the power and limitations of sequential predictions algorithms when no probabilistic assumptions are placed on the data generating mechanism. High dimensional and network data analysis: We are developing scalable algorithms with provable performance guarantees for learning from high dimensional and network data. Optimization algorithms: We are creating incremental, distributed and parallel algorithms for machine learning problems arising in today’s data rich world. Reinforcement learning: We are synthesizing concepts and techniques from artificial intelligence, control theory and operations research for pushing the frontier in sequential decision making with a focus on delivering personalized health interventions via mobile devices. My research group is pursuing and continues to actively search for challenging machine learning problems that arise across disciplines including behavioral sciences, computational biology, computational chemistry, learning sciences, and network science. Research to deliver personalized interventions in real-time via people’s mobile devices Andrea Thomer is an assistant professor of information at the University of Michigan School of Information. She conducts research in the areas of data curation, museum informatics, earth science and biodiversity informatics, information organization, and computer supported cooperative work. She is especially interested in how people use and create data and metadata; the impact of information organization on information use; issues of data provenance, reproducibility, and integration; and long-term data curation and infrastructure sustainability. She is studying a number of these issues through the “Migrating Research Data Collections” project – a recently awarded Laura Bush 21st Century Librarianship Early Career Research Grant from the Institute of Museum and Library Services. Dr. Thomer received her doctorate in Library and Information Science from the School of Information Sciences at the University of Illinois at Urbana‐Champaign in 2017. One branch of my research considers how to use data and models to improve manufacturing productivity. We look at how to capture streaming data from the factory floor, put it together with models encapsulated in “digital twins”, and use the predictions to better schedule production, plan maintenance, detect anomalies (including cyber-attacks), reconfigure the manufacturing system or supply chain to react to disturbances, and improve quality. We use models based on physics, subject-matter expertise, and historical data. We partner with various companies and industries to understand the needs and opportunities. Another branch of my research considers how to improve the performance of human-robot teams through modeling and feedback. We run user studies with semi-automated vehicles and robots, and ask humans to work together with the automation to accomplish tasks. We collect physiological and behavioral data, build models of trust and situation awareness, and adapt the automation to enhance the overall team performance. Models are built using historical data and are informed by existing literature. Accomplishments and Awards Robotics leader Dawn Tilbury elected to National Academy of Engineering My research utilizes computational social science and artificial intelligence to derive contextually informed algorithmic frameworks for understanding individuals and the social systems which influence their behavior, and for supporting positive behavior change within these systems. In particular, I analyze policy and behavior, and apply interactive behavior support and predictive algorithms, within the areas of higher education, environmental sustainability, and political participation. Individuals are increasing spend their time in quasi-digital environments generating a wealth of data traces with which to understand their behavior. However, this data can produce its own set of challenges (sparsity, heterogeneity, connectivity) and generating new understandings of human behavior necessitates novel statistical and computational approaches. In my work I address these challenges by developing probabilistic frameworks which can capitalize on structure between data instances, producing state-of-the-art performance in tasks from predicting household appliance energy consumption with an energy disaggregation framework to predicting the movements of human traffickers. Accomplishments and Awards The disparate impacts of college admissions policies on Asian American applicants Kentaro Toyama is W. K. Kellogg Professor of Community Information at the University of Michigan School of Information and a fellow of the Dalai Lama Center for Ethics and Transformative Values at MIT. He is the author of “Geek Heresy: Rescuing Social Change from the Cult of Technology.” Toyama conducts interdisciplinary research to understand how the world’s low-income communities interact with digital technology and to invent new ways for technology to support their socio-economic development, including computer simulations of complex systems for policy-making. Previously, Toyama did research in artificial intelligence, computer vision, and human-computer interaction at Microsoft and taught mathematics at Ashesi University in Ghana. Interacting with children at a Seva Mandir school in Rajasthan, India. Accomplishments and Awards AI is here – and everywhere: 3 AI researchers look to the challenges ahead in 2024 Michael Traugott, PhD, is Professor Emeritus of Communication Studies, Professor Emeritus of Political Science, College of Literature, Science, and the Arts, Research Professor Emeritus, Center for Political Studies and Adjunct Research Professor, Center for Political Studies, Institute for Social Research. Professor Traugott studies the mass media and their impact on American politics. This includes research on the use of the media by candidates in their campaigns and its impact on voters, as well as the ways that campaigns are covered and the impact of this coverage on candidates. He has a particular interest in the use of surveys and polls and the way news organizations employ them to cover campaigns and elections. My lab researches how the human brain processes social and affective information and how these processes are affected in psychiatric disorders, especially schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. We use behavioral, electrophysiological (EEG), neuroimaging (functional MRI), eye tracking, brain stimulation (TMS, tACS), and computational methods in our studies. One main focus of our work is building and validating computational models based on intensive, high-dimensional subject-level behavior and brain data to explain clinical phenomena, parse mechanisms, and predict patient outcome. The goal is to improve diagnostic and prognostic assessment, and to develop personalized treatments. Brain activation (in parcellated map) during social and face processing. * Causal Relationship and Shared Genetic Loci between Psoriasis and Type 2 Diabetes through Trans-Disease Meta-Analysis. J Invest Dermatol.141(6): 1493-1502, 06/2021. This study investigates the genetic overlap and causal relationships between psoriasis and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Using trans-disease meta-analysis (TDMA), we identified shared genetic loci that suggest a potential common pathophysiological pathway between the two diseases. This pioneer work highlights a clear genetic link between T2D and psoriasis independent of confounding factors, such as BMI. Applying robust statistical techniques for TDMA to data from over one million individuals, we identified four shared genetic signals, two of which are new findings for each disease, and we then evaluated them in a hospital-based dataset (42,112 individuals). Our study confirmed the significance of these loci using five different TDMA techniques, in addition to rigorous selection criteria. These findings suggest potential roles of NFκB mediator TRAF6 as a hub protein connecting the 4 identified loci. The findings of this work can serve as a starting point for developing new, more effective medicine for T2D and psoriasis, as well as other immune-mediated diseases. Moreover, we applied multi-variable Mendelian randomization techniques to demonstrate psoriasis has a significant causal effect on T2D, independent of BMI and other confounders. * Retrospective pharmacogenetic study of psoriasis highlights the role of KLK7 in tumour necrosis factor signalling. Br J Dermatol.190(1): 70-79, 12/2023. Treatment responses for psoriasis can vary, and it is important to understand factors associated with this variation. Linking to our Michigan psoriasis genetic cohort, we have collected the drug responses of six different treatment options, enabling us to conduct retrospective genome-wide pharmacogenetic studies. We associated genetic markers with self-evaluated treatment responses from six different options using linear regression. We further utilized an integrative approach incorporating epigenomic, transcriptomic, and a longitudinal clinical cohort to provide biological implications for the top signals associated with treatment response. We identified two novel genetic markers, one associated with anti-TNF biologics, and the other associated with methotrexate. These two markers are also associated with cutaneous mRNA expression levels of two known psoriasis-related genes: KLK7 and CD200. We further confirmed that the expression level of KLK7 is increased in the psoriatic epidermis and responses to anti-TNF treatment. We also found that keratinocytes have decrease in pro-inflammatory responses to TNF, by inhibiting the expression of KLK7. These findings highlight the role of KLK7 in modulating TNF signaling in keratinocytes, offer valuable insights for personalizing treatment in psoriasis patients, and present potential targets for loci and genes for future psoriasis drug development. My research spans security, privacy, and optimization of data collection particularly as applied to the Smart Grid, an augmented and enhanced paradigm for the conventional power grid. I am particularly interested in optimization approaches that take a notion of security and/or privacy into the modeling explicitly. At the intersection of the Intelligent Transportation Systems, Smart Grid, and Smart Cities, I am interested in data privacy and energy usage in smart parking lots. Protection of data and availability, especially under assault through a Denial-of-Service attacks, represents another dimension of my area of research interests. I am working on developing data privacy-aware bidding applications for the Smart Grid Demand Response systems without relying on trusted third parties. Finally, I am interested in educational and pedagogical research about teaching computer science, Smart Grid, cyber security, and data privacy. This figure shows the data collection model I used in developing a practical and secure Machine-to-Machine data collection protocol for the Smart Grid. Dr. Valley’s research focuses on understanding and improving decision-making in the intensive care unit (ICU). His primary line of research seeks to identify the patients most likely to benefit from intensive care, allowing clinicians to safely triage patients between the ICU and the general ward. Ultimately, he hopes to identify ICU-based therapies that can be transferred to the general ward to improve hospital efficiency and reduce healthcare costs. Dr. Valley’s research interests also include enhancing diagnosis in critical illness, improving the ICU experience for family members of ICU patients, and reducing barriers to cost-effective pulmonary and critical care. Accomplishments and Awards AI guardrails can fall short in health care: study The focus of the research in our group is two fold. 1) We use stellar kinematics in galactic nuclei to infer the masses of super massive black holes using dynamical modeling. This includes a combination of statistical and optimization methods to fit data from telescopes such as the James Webb Space telescope. My group also uses galactic dynamical simulations to study the effects that black holes have on their host galaxies and statistical methods to compare observed galaxies with simulations. 2) We construct dynamical models of the Milky Way to understand its structure, dynamics and formation history. We construct models with 9-dimensional data (3D positions, 3D velocities, iron-abundance, alpha-element abundance, age) for tens of millions of individual stars in the Milky Way to constrain the properties of dark matter. Dark matter is the substance that constitute 85-90% of the mass budget in the Universe but is still undetected. The data science methods used here including unsupervised learning to identify clusters in 6D-9D phase space – which enables us to identify the satellites that built up the Milky Way and the nature of the dark matter in these satellites, Bayesian inference to constrain the nature of dark matter by characterizing the structure of tidal streams, deep learning to infer properties like ages and distances of stars from their spectra. Dr. Van Berkel is an assistant professor at The University of Michigan, School for Environment and Sustainability. His research focuses on understanding land change at diverse scales; the physical and psychological benefit of exposure to natural environments; and how digital visualization of data can add new place-based knowledge in science and community decision-making. He has expertise in spatial statistics, data science, big data, and machine learning. Van Berkel is currently a Co-PI on an NSF grant examining how online webtools can enable the public to co-create landscape designs for novel solutions to climate-change adaptation and mitigation in urban areas. He is also part of the NOAA funded GLISA project developing land change models to support knowledge discovery in municipalities throughout the Great Lake States. His work in AI focuses on deciphering complex sentiment from multimodal content, such as understanding image content and analyzing captions and tags posted by users, at scale. This research aims to provide objective measures of behavior and attitude for modeling diverse values and benefits of nature globally. Accomplishments and Awards Great Lakes cities could be come destinations for climate change migrants Efficient, low regret contextual multi-armed bandit approaches for real time learning including Thompson sampling, UCB, and knowledge gradient descent. Integration of optimization and predictive analytics for determining the time to next measurement, which modality to use, and the optimal control of risk factors to manage chronic disease. Integration of soft voting ensemble classifiers and multiple models Kalman filters for disease state prediction, Real-time (online) contextual multi-armed bandits integrated with optimization of hospital bed type dynamic control decisions for reducing 30-day readmission rates in hospitals. Robustness in system optimization when the system model is uncertain with emphasis on quantile regression forests, sample average approximation, robust optimization and distributionally robust optimization. Health care delivery systems models with prediction and control for inpatient and outpatient. Work has been done on Emergency Department redesign for improved patient flow; Capacity management and planning and scheduling for outpatient care, including integrated services networks; admission control with machine learning to ICUs, stepdown, and regular care units Surgical planning and scheduling for access delay control; Planning and scheduling for Clinical Research Units. 9.9.2020 MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch Video. Machine learning, system modeling, and stochastic control can be used to slow the rate of glaucoma progression based on treatment aggressiveness options selected jointly with the patient. Dr. VanEseltine is a sociologist and data scientist working with large-scale administrative data for causal and policy analysis. His interests include studying the effects of scientific infrastructure, training, and initiatives, as well as the development of open, sustainable, and replicable systems for data construction, curation, and dissemination. As part of the Institute for Research on Innovation and Science (IRIS), he contributes to record linkage and data improvements in the research community releases of UMETRICS, a data system built from integrated records on federal award funding and spending from dozens of American universities. Dr. VanEseltine’s recent work includes studying the impacts of COVID-19 on academic research activity. The ROAHM (Robotics and Optimization for the Analysis of Human Motion) Lab seeks to understand and improve human and robot interaction with one another and with the environment. We devise techniques to diagnose unsafe behavior and construct controllers that can then safely intervene or aid in retraining. Our work seeks to develop practical solutions to these problems while providing mathematical guarantees regarding performance. We illustrate the utility of our work on a variety of robotic systems (some of which are depicted in the image below. Accomplishments and Awards Minority Report’s Greatest Prediction Isn’t the One You Think Dr. Veerapaneni’s research group develops fast and scalable algorithms for solving differential and integral equations on complex moving geometries. Application areas of current interest include large-scale simulations of blood flow through arbitrary confined geometries, electrohydrodynamics of soft particles and heat flow on time-varying domains. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Neural Quantum States at Scale: Applications in Sciences and Engineering. I am interested in how nuclear technologies specifically and complex technologies broadly—and their institutional infrastructures—can be designed in more creative, and participatory ways that are epistemically inclusive of both lay and expert perspectives. To this end, my work focuses on developing a more fundamental understanding of the early stages of the design process to improve design practice and pedagogy, and also improve the tools with which designers of complex systems work. I am particularly interested in developing novel approaches for gathering both qualitative and quantitative data generated throughout the design processes of complex systems and using this data to improve design outcomes. In my work, I focus on three main research questions: How can a fundamental understanding of design be used to improve design practice, design tools, and engineering pedagogy? How can design processes be made more open and participatory such that epistemic plurality and inclusivity are achieved as part of the design process? How can insights from design research be applied to the designs of policies and institutions for the governance — both innovation and regulation — of nuclear technologies? Image: The Sociotechnical Readiness Level, which is a framework which critiques and reimagines the traditional Technology Readiness Level Framework. As part of the new SRL framework, we are developing new metrics and indicators to measure both social and technical aspects of a technology’s readiness throughout its design and development process. What are some of your most interesting projects? Two new projects I am most excited about are (1) developing a sociotechnical readiness level framework for the assessment of novel technologies and (2) diagnosing the causes of cost overruns in the early stages of technology design. In the first project, we are critiquing and reimagining the traditional Technology Readiness Level framework to capture both societal and engineering aspects of a technology’s readiness and integrate them into a single framework. As part of this work, we will develop metrics and indicators for assessing a technology’s readiness across the nine levels of sociotechnical readiness. In the second project, we are studying how decisions made in the early stages of design impact overall system cost. This work is especially crucial in a nuclear energy context because recent nuclear plant construction projects have been severely impacted by cost overruns as well as project delays. It is vitally important to diagnose the causes of these cost overruns and address them in the early stages of the design if nuclear reactors are to play a significant role in our low-carbon energy systems. How did you end up where you are today? I was drawn to the field of nuclear engineering because of the enormous potential nuclear technologies have for solving one of the grandest challenges of our time: access to reliable, clean, and abundant energy. What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? I hope to develop a deeper and more fundamental understanding of the design processes of complex systems that leads to more creative, robust, societally, and environmentally beneficial design outcomes. What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? There is an enormous opportunity to use data science and AI to study the early stages of the design processes of complex systems and develop new tools to stimulate a broader exploration of the design space and to ensure better design outcomes. What are 1-3 interesting facts about yourself? I love learning new languages. Depending on how you count, I speak (with varying levels of ability) six (or seven). The Violi Lab carries out cross-disciplinary research at the intersection of nanoscience and data science. By integrating machine learning techniques with molecular simulations, the team strives to unravel fundamental scientific principles while tackling practical problems in material science, healthcare, and environmental sustainability. Their methodological toolkit encompasses various cutting-edge approaches: active learning and Bayesian experimental design to improve sample efficiency; advanced gradient boosting techniques for predictive modeling; specialized neural networks to decode protein-nanoparticle interactions; and Lasso-like algorithms for feature selection and regularization. Through this integrated approach, the lab aims to make significant contributions to both scientific understanding and technological innovation. Research on computational modeling of energy materials design and optimization 1) I led this large research project on developing machine-learning guided materials discovery demonstrating speed-up of over 80% over traditional methods. 2) My research group runs a popular Scientific Machine Learning webinar series: https://micde.umich.edu/news-events/sciml-webinar-series/ V.G.Vinod Vydiswaran, PhD, is Assistant Professor in the Department of Learning Health Sciences with a secondary appointment in the School of Information at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Dr. Vydiswaran’s research focuses on developing and applying text mining, natural language processing, and machine learning methodologies for extracting relevant information from health-related text corpora. This includes medically relevant information from clinical notes and biomedical literature, and studying the information quality and credibility of online health communication (via health forums and tweets). His previous work includes developing novel information retrieval models to assist clinical decision making, modeling information trustworthiness, and addressing the vocabulary gap between health professionals and  laypersons. Accomplishments and Awards AI could flag patients’ dangerous alcohol use before surgery Social Acceptability of Health Behavior Posts on Social Media: An Experiment James Wagner, Ph.D. is a Research Professor at the University of Michigan’s Survey Research Center (UM-SRC). His research is in the area of survey nonresponse and methods for addressing it during data collection. He has co-authored a book on adaptive survey design — which is a set of methods that aims to optimize the recruitment of heterogeneous samples to participate in surveys. He has a strong focus on measures of data quality, particularly related to missing data. He is currently UM-PI for the Army study to Assess Risk & Resilience in Servicemembers — Longitudinal Study. This is a panel study of mental health among soldiers and veterans. The study involves the linkage of survey and administrative data in order to predict mental health outcomes. He is also a co-developer for a Coursera course on data quality. The course covers methods for identifying, measuring, and correcting error in data gathered from surveys, administrative data, and other sources. He has had a focus on multiple aspects of data quality — a “total data quality” perspective. He believes that this perspective can be helpful as a conceptual framework for those working across data from multiple sources. I use machine-learning techniques to implement decision support systems and tools that facilitate more personalized care for disease management and healthcare utilization to ultimately deliver efficient, effective, and equitable therapy for chronic diseases. To test and advance these general principles, I have built operational programs that are guiding—and improving—patient care in costly in low resource settings, including emerging countries. Nils G. Walter, PhD, is the Francis S. Collins Collegiate Professor of Chemistry, Biophysics and Biological Chemistry, College of Literature, Science, and the Arts and Professor of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Nature and Nanotechnology likewise employ nanoscale machines that self-assemble into structures of complex architecture and functionality.  Fluorescence microscopy offers a non-invasive tool to probe and ultimately dissect and control these nanoassemblies in real-time.  In particular, single molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer (smFRET) allows us to measure distances at the 2-8 nm scale, whereas complementary super-resolution localization techniques based on Gaussian fitting of imaged point spread functions (PSFs) measure distances in the 10 nm and longer range.  In terms of Big Data Analysis, we have developed a method for the intracellular single molecule, high-resolution localization and counting (iSHiRLoC) of microRNAs (miRNAs), a large group of gene silencers with profound roles in our body, from stem cell development to cancer.  Microinjected, singly-fluorophore labeled, functional miRNAs are tracked at super-resolution within individual diffusing particles.  Observed mobility and mRNA dependent assembly changes suggest the existence of two kinetically distinct assembly processes.  We are currently feeding these data into a single molecule systems biology pipeline to bring into focus the unifying molecular mechanism of such a ubiquitous gene regulatory pathway.  In addition, we are using cluster analysis of smFRET time traces to show that large RNA processing machines such as single spliceosomes – responsible for the accurate removal of all intervening sequences (introns) in pre-messenger RNAs – are working as biased Brownian ratchet machines.  On the opposite end of the application spectrum, we utilize smFRET and super-resolution fluorescence microscopy to monitor enhanced enzyme cascades and nanorobots engineered to self-assemble and function on DNA origami. Artistic depiction of the SiMREPS platform we are building for the direct single molecule counting of miRNA biomarkers in crude biofluids (Johnson-Buck, A. et al. Kinetic fingerprinting to identify and count single nucleic acids. Nat Biotechnol 33, 730-732 (2015)). Naisyin Wang, PhD, is Professor of Statistics, College of Literature, Science, and the Arts, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Wang’s main research interests involve developing models and methodologies for complex biomedical data. She has developed approaches in information extraction from imperfect data due to measurement errors and incompleteness. Her other methodology developments include model-based mixture modeling, non- and semiparametric modeling of longitudinal, dynamic and high dimensional data. She developed approaches that first gauge the effects of measurement errors on non-linear mixed effects models and provided statistical methods to analyze such data. Most methods she has developed are so called semi-parametric based. One strength of such approaches is that one does not need to make certain structure assumptions about part of the model. This modeling strategy enables data integration from measurements collected from sources that might not be completely homogeneous. Her recently developed statistical methods focus on regularized approach and model building, selection and evaluation for high dimensional, dynamic or functional data. Regularized time-varying ODE coefficients of SEI dynamic equation for the Canadian measles incidence data (Li, Zhu, Wang, 2015). Left panel: time-varying ODE coefficient curve that reflects both yearly and seasonal effects with the regularized yearly effect (red curve) embedded; right panel: regularized (red curve), non-regularized (blue) and two-year local constant (circles) estimates of yearly effects. The new regularized method shows that the yearly effect is relatively large in the early years and deceases gradually to a constant after 1958. I am broadly interested in the economics of sports. My current research focuses primarily on two areas, two-sided markets and antitrust policy. Using e-commerce and social media data, I study the effect on consumer and social welfare when sports consumption move from traditional markets to the internet. My research is to support more people learn in effective ways. I draw techniques and theories from Human-Computer Interaction, Learning Sciences, and Artificial Intelligence to develop computational methods and systems to support scalable teaching and learning. There are several directions in my research that draw on data science techniques and also contribute to interdisciplinary data science research, 1) data-driven authoring techniques of intelligent tutoring systems, with application domains in UX education and data science education 2) AI-augmented instructional design and the use Human-AI collaborative techniques in instructional design. View MIDAS Faculty Research Pitch, Fall 2021 Yixin Wang works in the fields of Bayesian statistics, machine learning, and causal inference, with applications to recommender systems, text data, and genetics. She also works on algorithmic fairness and reinforcement learning, often via connections to causality. Her research centers around developing practical and trustworthy machine learning algorithms for large datasets that can enhance scientific understandings and inform daily decision-making. Her research interests lie in the intersection of theory and applications. Dr. Wentao Wang is currently a research faculty in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in 2016 from Harbin Institute of Technology, supervised by Prof. Hui Li and Prof. Jerome P. Lynch Lu’s research is focused on natural language processing, computational social science, and machine learning. More specifically, Lu works on algorithms for text summarization, language generation, argument mining, information extraction, and discourse analysis, as well as novel applications that apply such techniques to understand media bias and polarization and other interdisciplinary subjects. Runzi Wang is a transdisciplinary researcher who studies change in natural and urban environments across space and over time, with the objective of driving positive change with ecological planning and design strategies. Combining technologies such as big data, machine learning, remote sensing, and spatial statistics, her primary research explores how land cover change and urban development pattern influence stream water quality and stormwater quality at the watershed basis, together with various environmental, climatic, and sociocultural factors. By enhancing the interpretability of machine learning in its application to landscape architecture, the most innovative part of her research is to uncover the nonlinear, interacted relationships between environmental, technological, and sociocultural dimensions of landscape systems. What are some of your most interesting projects? I conducted the first continental-scale urban stream water quality study funded by MIDAS. We applied geospatial analysis to investigate the characteristics of the built environment (e.g., building footprint, street length, land use spatial pattern) associated with urban stream water quality, the social inequities regarding exposure to stream water contamination, as well as the spatial variations in the above processes. We developed data integration protocols for data from remote sensing products, in-situ observations, and the US Census Bureau. Using Bayesian hierarchical models, we concluded that watersheds with a higher percentage of minorities are associated with higher nutrient pollution, with the relationship being more significant in the American Northwest. I investigated how land use planning and best management practices mitigated climate change effects on Lake Erie’s water quality. With the integration of longitudinal watershed land cover, agricultural, and climatic data from 1985-2017, we found that no-tillage and reduced tillage management were effective mitigation strategies that could decrease water quality sensitivity to climate change. We plan to advance this work by fusing remote sensing-based bloom detection and process-based simulation to investigate how climate change, land cover change, and anthropogenic activities will impact the eutrophication of Lake Erie. How did you end up where you are today? I have a highly interdisciplinary background, receiving training in architecture, landscape architecture, urban planning, statistics, hydrology and water quality, and broader social science topics. This forms my research topic to study the relationships between people, land, and water. Specifically, I study the interconnectedness between people living in the watershed, the land use and urban form of the watershed’s built form, the resulting water quality conditions, and the ecosystem services urban streams provide for people. This background also leverages many different methodologies in my work, including data science, hydrological models, social science methods, and so on. In addition, the most important thing about my research journey is that I have a few excellent friends/researchers who help me a lot on my way and make my research life inspiring and delightful most of the time. Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Data Science Approach towards a Socio-ecological Framework for the Investigation of Continental Urban Stream Water Quality Pattern My research focuses on novel biomedical imaging and treatment technologies, especially those involving light and ultrasound. I have extensive experience in medical system development, laser-tissue interactions, ultrasound tissue characterization, and adaptation of novel technologies to preclinical and clinical settings. A major part of my research is the development and clinical applications of photoacoustic imaging technology. By working on small-animal models and human patients, I have been seeking for clinical applications of this exciting technology to inflammatory arthritis, cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, eye diseases, osteoporosis, and brain disorders. Besides photoacoustic imaging, I am also interested in development of other medical imaging and treatment technologies, such as ionizing radiation induced acoustic imaging (iRAI) and photo-mediated ultrasound therapy (PUT). As the PI or co-Investigator of several NIH, NSF and DoD-funded research, I have successfully administered the projects, collaborated with other researchers, and produced high-quality publications. My contribution to biomedical optics and ultrasound up to now including over 160 peer-reviewed journal papers is a solid evidence of my creativity and ability to surmount the challenges in this field. I received the Sontag Foundation Fellow of the Arthritis National Research Foundation in 2005, the Distinguished Investigator Award of the Academy of Radiology Research in 2013, and was elected as the fellow of AIMBE in 2020 and the fellow of SPIE in 2022. What is your most interesting project? Automated photoacoustic imaging of inflammatory arthritis: Our research has demonstrated the unique capability of photoacoustic imaging (PAI) in diagnosis and treatment monitoring of inflammatory arthritis. The new physiological and molecular biomarkers of synovitis presented by PAI can help in characterizing disease onset, progression, and response to therapy. Based on the endogenous optical contrast, PAI is extremely sensitive to the changes in hemodynamic properties in inflammatory joint tissues (e.g. enhanced flow and hypoxia). We are now conducting a preclinical research on patients affected by rheumatoid arthritis. The initial findings from this patient study are promising and suggest that the new optical contrast and physiological information introduced by PAI could greatly enhance the sensitivity and accuracy of diagnostic imaging and treatment monitoring of arthritis. Aiming at clinical translation, we are currently developing a point-of-care PAI and ultrasound dual-modality imaging system which is fully automated when powered by a robot and AI technologies. Ionizing radiation acoustic imaging (iRAI) for personalized radiation therapy: iRAI, as a brand-new imaging technology relying on the detection of radiation-induced acoustic waves, allows online monitoring of radiation’s interactions with tissues during radiation therapy, providing real-time, adaptive feedback for cancer treatments. We are developing an iRAI volumetric imaging system that enables mapping of the three-dimensional (3D) radiation dose distribution in a complex clinical radiotherapy treatment. The feasibility of imaging temporal 3D dose accumulation was first validated in studies on phantoms and animal models. Then, real-time visualization of the 3D radiation dose delivered to a patient with liver metastases was accomplished with a clinical linear accelerator. These studies demonstrate the great potential of iRAI to monitor and quantify the 3D radiation dose deposition during treatment, potentially improving radiotherapy treatment efficacy using real-time adaptive treatment. Describe your research journey. 2005 – 2007 Research Investigator, Department of Radiology, University of Michigan 2007 – 2008 Research Assistant Professor, Department of Radiology, University of Michigan 2008 – 2012 Assistant Professor, Department of Radiology, University of Michigan Medical School 2012 – 2014 Associate Professor, Department of Radiology, University of Michigan 2015 – 2018 Associate Professor, Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan 2018 – 2022 Professor, Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan 2022 – Now Jonathan Rubin Collegiate Professor of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? Develop and translate state-of-the-art medical imaging and treatment technologies. What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? Date science and AI is super important in developing state-of-the-art medical imaging and treatment technologies, especially for achieving personalized diagnosis and treatment ensuring largely improved patient outcome. As mentioned in the above, the automated imaging system for rheumatology/radiology clinic for arthritis imaging would be strongly powered by AI, which is crucial to achieve our goal of a “smart” ultrasound imaging platform. My research interests are in causal inference, randomized clinical trials, clustered data and their interactions with infectious disease research. In my research, data analysis is the core, and I use semi-parametric models and machine learning algorithms to draw statistical inference, make predictions, and quantify uncertainties. My areas of expertise include programming languages, formal methods, software engineering, artificial intelligence, including their applications in data systems and data science. For example, how to derive insights from large amount of data for decision making; how to automatically synthesize SQL queries from high-level specifications (such as examples, natural language, etc.); how to formally verify the correctness of query optimization results. Kevin Ward, MD, is Professor of Emergency Medicine in the department of Emergency Medicine in the University of Michigan Medical School. Dr. Ward is the director of the Weil Institute for Critical Care Research and Innovation. Dr. Ward’s research interests span the field of critical illness and injury ranging from combat casualty care to the intensive care unit. His approach is to develop and leverage broad platform technologies capable of use throughout all echelons of care of the critically ill and injured as well as in all age groups. Dr. Ward’s work has been funded by the NIH, Department of Defense, NSF, and industry. Accomplishments and Awards Two U-M faculty members elected to National Academy of Inventors In the Weeks lab, we work at the intersection of ecology and evolutionary biology to try to understand how large scale biodiversity patterns arose, and what they might tell us about how natural systems will respond to human activities. We have a particular focus on the impacts of climate change on birds, and are increasingly using computer vision tools to measure bird traits on large numbers of photographs of museum skeletal specimens. This new approach has enabled us to generate skeletal trait datasets at an unprecedented scale that have begun to reveal some fascinating patterns in bird morphology that we are using to understand biotic responses to global change. My research focuses on developing machine learning and statistical methods to analyze multi-modality data for patient outcome modeling. These models can be used to personalize cancer patients’ treatment and improve their prognosis. We emphasize on interpretable AI in health care to understand the underlying biological mechanisms that contribute to the specific outcomes for different individuals to provide robust treatment assist for sequential decision making in the practice. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Interpretable machine learning to identify tumor spatial features from longitudinal multi-modality images for personalized progression risk prediction of poor prognosis head and neck cancer Our research aims to address fundamental problems in both biomedical research and computer science by developing new tools tailored to rapidly emerging single-cell omic technologies. Broadly, we seek to understand what genes define the complement of cell types and cell states within healthy tissue, how cells differentiate to their final fates, and how dysregulation of genes within specific cell types contributes to human disease. As computational method developers, we seek to both employ and advance the methods of machine learning, particularly for unsupervised analysis of high-dimensional data. We have particular expertise in manifold learning, matrix factorization, and deep learning approaches. Accomplishments and Awards Five mid-career researchers receive Biosciences Initiative award Xiaoquan (William) Wen is an Associate Professor of Biostatistics. He received his PhD in Statistics from the University of Chicago in 2011 and joined the faculty at the University of Michigan in the same year. His research centers on developing Bayesian and computational statistical methods to answer interesting scientific questions arising from genetics and genomics. In the applied field,  he is  particularly interested in seeking statistically sound and computationally efficient solutions to scientific problems in the areas of genetics and functional genomics. Quantifying tissue-specific expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) via Bayesian model comparison My current research interests include the implications of measurement error in auxiliary variables and survey paradata for survey estimation, survey nonresponse, interviewer variance, and multilevel regression models for clustered and longitudinal data. I also conduct research in statistical software. Jenna Wiens, PhD, is Associate Professor of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) in the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Wiens currently heads the MLD3 research group. Her primary research interests lie at the intersection of machine learning, data mining, and healthcare. Within machine learning, she is particularly interested in time-series analysis, transfer/multitask learning, causal inference, and learning intelligible models. The overarching goal of her research is to develop the computational methods needed to help organize, process, and transform patient data into actionable knowledge. Her work has applications in modeling disease progression and predicting adverse patient outcomes. For several years now, Prof. Wiens has been focused on developing accurate patient risk stratification approaches that leverage spatiotemporal data, with the ultimate goal of reducing the rate of healthcare-associated infections among patients admitted to hospitals in the US. In addition to her research in the healthcare domain, she also spends a portion of my time developing new data mining techniques for analyzing player tracking data from the NBA. Accomplishments and Awards AI guardrails can fall short in health care: study I have several areas of study that touch on the fields of Data Science. First I am the UM PI of PCORnet a national network of over 80 institutions that support clinical research.  PCORnet possesses a common data model allowing for the harmonization of the electronic health record across the network. The common data model is helpful in cohort discovery, development of computable phenotypes, the study of rare diseases, and applications of machine learning for identifying patterns in disease and health care services that can help to form better models of precision care. My second area of interest is in the use of big data to support behavioral change.  PainGuide is a digital pain self-management program developed at UM that offers a variety of evidence-based methods for improving and managing pain. User data can inform AI algorithms to refine content and recommendations for the participants so as to personalize care and improve outcomes. I study human communication using Natural Language Processing methods with a focus on understanding and incorporating the social context of text data and the people that create it. I am broadly interested in how people sift through and add to the vast body of online content, how they tell stories and make sense of the world around them, and how their personal values and beliefs are reflected in both what and how they write. I have always been interested in technology and people and even switched between majoring in psychology and computer science during my undergraduate studies. During graduate school, for the first time, I had the chance to blend these interests with an interdisciplinary research project on computational approaches to modeling personal values as expressed in language. That project eventually became the foundation for my PhD dissertation. During my postdoc, I broadened my focus to other areas of computational social science and later connected these interests to my teaching and research lab as a faculty member. I am grateful to have the chance to work with amazing students as we all continue to learn and contribute. I am excited about the opportunity to work with people from all kinds of disciplines, which makes data science one of the most exciting areas to work in. I have the chance to constantly learn new things through research collaborations, and applying computing to fields like psychology or communication provides unique opportunities to make a positive societal impact. Terrence Wong is a Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine and Cancer Biology. The long-term goal of his research is to understand how altered hematopoiesis resulting from somatic mutations and/or epigenetic dysregulation impacts both malignant and non-malignant disease. During his PhD training at The University of Chicago, he worked with Dr. Tao Pan to investigate how the transcriptional process impacts in vivo RNA folding. After graduate school, he completed his residency in internal medicine and fellowship in hematology/oncology at Washington University in St. Louis. He performed my post-doctoral research with Dr. Daniel Link, studying how aging-associated somatic mutations impact the behavior of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) under cellular stress. One of their seminal findings was that HSCs harboring aging-associated TP53 mutations gain a competitive fitness advantage under the selective pressure of cytotoxic therapy, allowing them to clonally expand and potentially progress to therapy-related AML/MDS. Since starting his own independent research program at the University of Michigan, he has continued to investigate how somatic mutations impact hematopoiesis and how mutant hematopoietic populations impact human health. Clinically, he primarily treats patients with hematologic malignancies on the inpatient leukemia and bone marrow transplant wards. Analysis of policing technology and police data, including impact assessment of surveillance technology, media sentiment analysis, and fatal police violence. Methods include topological data analysis, natural language processing, multivariate time series analysis, difference-in-differences, and complex networks. IN MEMORIAM (1979-2024) Statistical mechanics offers an elegant description of physical systems whose macroscopic properties arise, at least in part, from mathematical laws governing large ensembles. The picture that emerges is profound: the collective behaviors of many complex systems do not depend on microscopic intricacies but instead on statistical properties shared by a large number of systems.  Research in the Wood group focuses on the development and application of similar approaches for the study of living systems, where biologically-relevant dynamics—for example, the evolution of drug-resistance in a population of cancer cells—emerge from interactions and competition between a large number of individual components.  Using both theoretical and experimental tools, we study a wide range of biological systems, with particular emphasis on systems dominated by heterogeneities, non-equilibrium dynamics, strong interactions with the environment, or rare events. Our goal is to develop a quantitative physical understanding that can be used to predict, and in some cases, control these biological systems.  We are also interested in exploring when, and why, statistical or dynamical properties lead to universal behaviors common to entire classes of living systems.   Our research is highly multi-disciplinary and combines theoretical tools from physics, engineering, applied math, and computer science with experimental approaches from molecular biology, genetics, microbiology, and cancer biology. Zhenke Wu is an Assistant Professor of Biostatistics, and a core faculty member in the Michigan Institute of Data Science (MIDAS). He received his Ph.D. in Biostatistics from the Johns Hopkins University in 2014 and then stayed at Hopkins for his postdoctoral training before joining the University of Michigan. Dr. Wu’s research focuses on the design and application of statistical methods that inform health decisions made by individuals, or precision medicine. The original methods and software developed by Dr. Wu are now used by investigators from research institutes such as CDC and Johns Hopkins, as well as site investigators from developing countries, e.g., Kenya, South Africa, Gambia, Mali, Zambia, Thailand and Bangladesh. Profile: At a “sweet spot” of data science By Dan Meisler Communications Manager, ARC I f you had to name two of the more exciting, emerging fields of data science, electronic health records (EHR) and mobile health might be near the top of the list. Zhenke Wu, one of the newest MIDAS core faculty members, has one foot firmly in each field. “These two fields share the common goal of learning from the experience of the population in the past to advance health and clinical decisions for those to follow. I am looking forward to more work that will bring the two fields closer to continuously generate insights about human health.” Wu said. “I’m in a sweet spot.” Wu joined U-M in Fall 2016, after earning a PhD in Biostatistics from Johns Hopkins University, and a bachelor’s in Mathematics from Fudan University. He said the multitude of large-scale studies going on at U-M and access to EHR databases were factors in his coming to Michigan. “The University of Michigan is an exciting place that has a diversity of large-scale databases and supportive research groups in the fields I’m interested in,” he said. Wu is collaborating with the Michigan Genomics Initiative , which is a biorepository effort at Michigan Medicine to integrate genome-wide information with EHR from approximately 40,000 patients undergoing anesthesia prior to surgery or diagnostic procedures. He’s also collaborating with Dr. Srijan Sen, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry and Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, on the MIDAS-supported project “Identifying Real-Time Data Predictors of Stress and Depression Using Mobile Technology,” the preliminary results of which recently matured into an NIH-funded R01 project “Mobile Technology to Identify Mechanisms Linking Genetic Variation and Depression” that will draw broad expertise from a multi-disciplinary team of medical and data science researchers. A visualization of data from the Michigan Genomics Initiative “One of my goals is to use an integrated and rigorous approach to predict how a person’s health status will be in the near future,” Wu said. Wu applies hierarchical Bayesian models to these problems, which he hopes will shed light on phenomena he describes as latent constructs that are “well-known, but less quantitatively understood, e.g., intelligence quotient (IQ) in psychology.” As another example, he cites the current challenge in active surveillance of prostate cancer patients for aggressive tumors requiring removal and/or radiation, or indolent tumors permitting continued surveillance. “The underlying status of aggressive versus indolent cancer is not observed, which needs to be learned from the results of biopsy and other clinical measurements,” he said. “The decisions and experience of urologists and their patients will greatly benefit from more accurate understanding of the tumor status… There are lots of scientific problems in clinical, biomedical, behavioral and social sciences where you have well-known but less quantitatively understood latent constructs. These are problems that Bayesian latent variable methods can formulate and address.” Just as Wu has a hand in two hot-button big data areas, he also sees himself as straddling the line between application and methodology. He says the large number of data sources — sensors, mobile apps, test results, and questionnaires, to name just a few — results in richness as well as some “messiness” that needs new methodologies to adjust, integrate and translate to new scientific insights. At the same time, a valid new methodology for dealing with, for example, electronic health data, will likely find numerous different applications. Wu says his approach was heavily influenced by his work in the Pneumonia Etiology Research for Child Health ( PERCH ) funded by the Gates Foundation while he was at Johns Hopkins. Pneumonia is a clinical syndrome due to lung infection that can be caused by more than 30 different species of pathogens, including bacteria, viruses and fungi. The goal of the seven-country study that enrolled more than 5,000 cases and 5,000 controls from Africa and Southeast Asia is to estimate the frequency with which each pathogen caused pneumonia in the population and the probability of each individual being infected by the list of pathogens in the lung. “In most settings, it is extremely difficult to identify the pathogen by directly sampling from the site of infection – the child’s lung. PERCH therefore looked for other sources of evidence by standardizing and comprehensively testing biofluids collected from sites peripheral to the lung. Using hierarchical Bayesian models to infer disease etiology by integrating such a large trove of data was extremely fun and exciting”, he said. Wu’s initial interest in math, leading to biostatistics and now data science, stems from what he called a “greedy” desire to learn the guiding principles of how the world works by rigorous data science. “If you have new problems, you can wait for other people to ask a clean math question, or you can go work with these messy problems and figure out interesting questions and their answers,” he said. For more on Dr. Wu, see his profile on Michigan Experts . Recent publications From experts.umich.edu Accomplishments and Awards 2021 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Scientifically-Structured Latent Variable Methods for High-Dimensional Data to Individualize Healthcare My research focuses on the interface of technology, finance and operations management. I develop and apply new approaches in natural language processing (NLP) and text analytics to study emerging and classic OM problems including (1) new marketplaces in both Fintech and Edtech, (2) supply chain risks, and (3) societal impact of OM/financial decisions. Dr. Xhabija joined the Department of Natural Sciences in September 2022 as an Assistant Professor of Biochemistry. Her laboratory aims to understand the effects of toxins on early embryonic development utilizing embryonic stem cells because they provide a new tool and opportunity to investigate the impact of environmental exposures and their interactions with genetic factors on human development and health. To fully realize these potentials, she believes that it is important to understand the molecular basis of the defining characteristic of the stem cells. More specifically, she is interested in investigating how stem cells play a role in shaping the expression program during development and how mechanisms of self-renewal and differentiation during mammalian development regulate cellular fate decisions. Xiaoling Xiang conducts community-based services research concerning the physical and mental health and service use of diverse older populations. She is particularly interested in psychosocial approaches to promoting mental health and enhancing the quality of life in older adults. Her other areas of research include the epidemiology of mental disorders in late life, comorbidity, quality of home and community-based services, and implementation of evidence-based interventions. She uses a variety of applied statistical methods in the analysis of data from national surveys, electronic medical records, insurance claims. My research focuses on developing and applying computational and data-enabled methodology in the broader area of sustainability. Main thrusts are as follows: Human mobility dynamics. I am interested in mining large-scale real-world travel trajectory data to understand human mobility dynamics. This involves the processing and analyzing travel trajectory data, characterizing individual mobility patterns, and evaluating environmental impacts of transportation systems/technologies (e.g., electric vehicles, ride-sharing) based on individual mobility dynamics. Global supply chains. Increasingly intensified international trade has created a connected global supply chain network. I am interested in understanding the structure of the global supply chain network and economic/environmental performance of nations. Networked infrastructure systems. Many infrastructure systems (e.g., power grid, water supply infrastructure) are networked systems. I am interested in understanding the basic structural features of these systems and how they relate to the system-level properties (e.g., stability, resilience, sustainability). A network visualization (force-directed graph) of the 2012 US economy using the industry-by-industry Input-Output Table (15 sectors) provided by BEA contains 405 industries. Each node represents a sector. The size of the node represents the economic output of the sector. The size and darkness of links represent the value of exchanges of goods/services between sectors. An interactive version and other data visualizations are available at http://mingxugroup.org/ Dr. Gongjun Xu is an assistant professor in the Department of Statistics at the University of Michigan. Dr. Xu’s research interests include latent variable models, psychometrics, cognitive diagnosis modeling, high-dimensional statistics, and semiparametric statistics. My research interests are in health economics and health services research; specifically econometric methods for causal inference, data architecture, and secondary analyses of big data. My primary focus is the study the work of nurses. I led the development of a new method for outcomes-based clinician performance productivity measurement using the electronic medical records. With this work, I was able to measure, for the first time, the value-added contributions of individual nurses to patient outcomes. This work has won her national recognition earning her the Best of AcademyHealth Research Meeting Award in 2014. I am is currently working to uncover traits and success strategies of highly-effective nurses, including education, experience, and expertise—and most recently smart clinician staffing approaches and innovation in the healthcare setting. I am a team scientist and contributed methodological expertise to many interdisciplinary projects including hospital readmissions, primary care providers, obesity, pregnancy and birth, and peer effects on health behaviors and outcomes. I am the Director of the Healthcare Innovation and Impact Program (HiiP) at the School of Nursing. Using big data analytics to measure value-added contributions of nurses Accomplishments and Awards Here’s Why Nurses Are Exiting Healthcare Study: Black patients less likely to get home health care referral than white peers My research program at the University of Michigan (UM) integrates the fields of biophysics, quantitative systems biology, and bottom-up synthetic biology to understand complex stochastic cellular and developmental processes in early embryos. We have developed innovative computational and experimental techniques in microfluidics and imaging to allow high-throughput quantitative manipulation and single-cell lineage tracking of cellular spatiotemporal dynamical processes in various powerful in vitro and in vivo systems we established in my lab. These systems range from cell-free extracts, synthetic cells reconstituted in microemulsion droplets, presomitic mesoderm (PSM) and progenitor zone (PZ) cells dissociated from the zebrafish tail buds, their re-aggregated 2D and 3D cell-cell communications, ex vivo live tissue explants, and live embryos. Our current research questions center around the understanding of the design-function relation of robust biological timing, growth, and patterning, how individual molecules and cells communicate to generate collective patterns, and how biochemical, biophysical, and biomechanical signals work together to shape morphogenesis during early embryo development. Dr. X. Jessie Yang is an Associate Professor in the Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering, with courtesy appointments at the School of Information. She is an expert in human-autonomy/robot interaction, particularly in modeling trust in human-autonomy teams. She and her team use machine learning tools to model human behaviors when interacting with autonomous and robotic agents. Dr. Yarbasi’s expertise lies in uncertainty quantification for complex systems, verification and validation (V&V) processes, robotics, energy systems modeling within smart building infrastructures, and systems engineering. Prior to joining U-M, he collaborated extensively with government and industry on a range of projects, including the development of a surgical endoscopy robot and the energy optimization of a net-zero-energy building. He worked with international experts on a NATO STO project to create a validation database for simulation environments in air and sea vehicle design. His dissertation expanded this work by developing a comprehensive methodology to identify critical uncertainties in complex multidisciplinary designs and guide experimentation to mitigate these uncertainties. Dr. Yarbasi’s research interests are born out of a deep passion for data and its potential to drive innovation in engineering. He leverages data-intensive methodologies to enhance the performance and safety of autonomous vehicles, smart city infrastructure, and Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) systems. By applying data analytics, machine learning, and optimization techniques, he aims to develop transportation systems that are efficient, reliable, sustainable, and responsive to real-time conditions. The focus of our research is to address (1) how neuronal development contributes to the assembly and function of the nervous system, and (2) how defects in this process lead to brain disorders. We take a multidisciplinary approach that include genetics, cell biology, developmental biology, biochemistry, advanced imaging (for neuronal structures and activity), electrophysiology, computation (including machine learning and computer vision) and behavioral studies. We are currently studying the neural basis for decision accuracy. We established imaging and computational methods for analyzing neural activities in the entire central nervous system (CNS) of the Drosophila larva. Moreover, we are exploring the possibility of applying the biological neural algorithms to robotics for testing these algorithms and for improving robot performance. A major goal of neuroscience is to understand the neural basis for behavior, which requires accurate and efficient quantifications of behavior. To this end, we recently developed a software tool—named LabGym—for automatic identification and quantification of user-defined behavior through artificial intelligence. This tool is not restricted to a specific species or a set of behaviors. The updated version (LabGym2) can analyze social behavior and behavior in dynamic backgrounds. We are further developing LabGym and other computational tools for behavioral analyses in wild animals and in medicine. The behavior that this chipmunk performed was identified and quantified by LabGym, an AI-based software tool that the Ye lab developed for quantifying user-defined behaviors. What are some of your most interesting projects? 1) Develop AI-based software tools for analyzing the behavior of wild animals and human. 2) Use biology-inspired robotics to test biological neural algorithms. How did you end up where you are today? Since my teenage years, I have been curious about how brains (human’s and animals’) work, enjoyed playing with electronics, and learning about computational sciences. My curiosity and opportunities led me to become a neuroscientist. When I had my own research team and the resources to explore my other interests, I started to build simple electronic devices for my neuroscience research and to collaborate with computational scientists who are experts in machine learning and computer vision. My lab now combines these approaches in our neuroscience research. What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? I am very excited about the interactions between neuroscience and data science/AI research. This is a new area and has great potential of changing the society. My research interests include the analysis, modeling, design and optimization of transportation systems towards achieving sustainability and economic efficiency. My ongoing research involves investigating the implications of emerging technologies on mobility services and systems. I closely follow the development of new technologies, such as smart mobile devices and apps, sensoring technologies, electric vehicles, drones, and connected and automated vehicles, and examine how they could potentially affect both the demand and supply sides of transportation systems, and then explore how to leverage these new technologies to better design, operate and manage transportation systems and improve the efficiency, reliability, safety, and diversity of the transportation services. Beyond transportation, Dr. Yin also studies the interdependency of urban infrastructure systems such as transportation, power and communications networks. Lei Ying’s research is broadly in the interplay of complex stochastic systems and big-data, including large-scale communication/computing systems for big-data processing, private data marketplaces, and large-scale graph mining. Amy M. Yorke, PT, PhD, NCS, is Assistant Professor of Physical Therapy at the University of Michigan, Flint. My research lies at the intersection of computer vision, human vision, and machine learning. Visual perception presents not just a fascinating computational problem, but more importantly an intelligent solution for large-scale data mining and pattern recognition applications. My research has thus three themes. 1. Actionable Representation Learning Driven by Natural Data. I attribute our fast effortless vision to actionable representation learning driven by natural data, where mid-level visual pieces can be reassembled and adapted for seeing the new. 2. Efficient Structure-Aware Machine Learning Models. I view a computational model as dual to the data it takes in; since visual data are full of structures, models reflective of such structures can achieve maximum efficiency. 3. Application to Science, Medicine, and Engineering. I am interested in applying computer vision and machine learning to capture and exceed human expertise, enabling automatic data-driven discoveries in science, medicine, and engineering. YZ’s research can be summarized into two words: Matter and Machine. On the Matter side, his group studies far-from-equilibrium physics. They synergistically combine and push the boundaries of statistical and stochastic thermodynamic theories, accelerated molecular simulations, understandable AI/ML/DS methods, and neutron scattering experiments, with the goal of significantly extending our understanding of a wide range of long timescale phenomena and rare events. Particular emphasis is given to the physics and chemistry of liquids and complex fluids, especially at interfaces, driven away from equilibrium, or under extreme conditions. On the Machine side, leveraging their expertise in materials and modeling, his group advances the development of soft robots and human-compatible machines, swarm robots and collective intelligence, and robots in extreme environments, which can lead to immediate societal impact. • Matter o Far-from-equilibrium physics, long timescale phenomena, and rare events (statistical and stochastic thermodynamic theories, accelerated molecular simulations, understandable AI/ML/DS methods) o Neutron scattering, sources, and instrumentation o Physics and chemistry of liquids and complex fluids, especially under interfacial/non-equilibrium/extreme conditions (water, metallic liquids, molten salts, ionic liquids, electrolyte solutions) • Machine o Soft robots and human-compatible machines o Swarm robots and collective intelligence o Robots in extreme environments Much of our work focuses on host-parasite coevolution both computationally using populations of self-replicating computer programs (sort of like computer viruses), and experimentally in the lab with bacteria and their viruses (bacteriophage). But that’s not all! We’re deeply interdisciplinary, and broadly interested in ecology and evolution. While I often approach questions from an experimentalist’s perspective, work in our lab relies on a mixture of computational, mathematical, and microbial systems. I am predominantly drawn to understanding host-parasite coevolution because the constant push-and-pull of antagonistic interactions emphasizes the dynamic and interdependent nature of biological evolution. These antagonistic interactions have been implicated in some fascinating large-scale evolutionary patterns, such as diversification, sexual reproduction, and increasing organismal complexity. Studying these processes using open-ended computational systems means generating, analyzing, and visualizing copious amounts of multidimensional data. Jon Zelner, PhD, is Assistant Professor in the department of Epidemiology in the University of Michigan School of Public Health. Dr. Zelner holds a second appointment in the Center for Social Epidemiology and Population Health. Dr. Zelner’s research is focused on using spatial analysis, social network analyisis and dynamic modeling to prevent infectious diseases, with a focus on tuberculosis and diarrheal disease. Jon is also interested in understanding how the social and biological causes of illness interact to generate observable patterns of disease in space and in social networks, across outcomes ranging from infection to mental illness. A large spatial cluster of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) cases in Lima, Peru is highlighted in red. A key challenge in my work is understanding why these cases cluster in space: can social, spatial, and genetic data tell us where transmission is occurring and how to interrupt it? Our work is interdisciplinary in nature and we connect three fields, chemistry, physics and materials science. Our goal is to develop theoretical tools that give access to directly experimentally relevant quantities. We develop and apply codes that describe two types of electronic motion (i) weakly correlated electrons originating from the delocalized “wave-like” s- and p-orbitals responsible for many electron correlation effects in molecules and solids that do not contain transition metal atoms (ii) strongly correlated electrons residing in the d- and f-orbitals that remain localized and behave “particle-like” responsible for many very interesting effects in the molecules containing d- and f-electrons (transition metal nano-particles used in catalysis, nano-devices with Kondo resonances and molecules of biological significance – active centers of metalloproteins). The mutual coupling of these two types of electronic motion is challenging to describe and currently only a few theories can properly account for both types of electronic correlation effects simultaneously. Available research projects in the group involve (1) working on a new theory that is able to treat weakly and strongly correlated electrons in molecules with multiple transition metal centers with applications to molecular magnets and active centers of enzymes (2) developing a theory for weakly correlated electrons that is able to produce reliable values of band gaps in semiconductors and heterostructures used in solar cells industry (3) applying the QM/QM embedding theories developed in our group to catalysis on transition metal-oxide surfaces and (4) applying the embedding formalism to molecular conductance problems in order to include correlation effects. Jun Zhang, PhD, is Professor of Mathematics, Statistics, and Psychology in the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Prof. Zhang develops algebraic and geometric methods for data analysis. Algebraic methods are based on theories of topology and partially ordered sets (in particular lattice theory); an example being formal concept analysis (FCA). Geometric methods include Information Geometry, which studies the manifold of probability density functions. He interests include mathematical psychology and computational neuroscience, broadly defined to include neural network theory and reinforcement learning, dynamical analysis of nervous system (single neuron activity and event-related potential), computational vision, choice-reaction time model, Bayesian decision theory and game theory. I develop computational methods to study conversations. I am interested in study how conversationalists use language to do things with and to each other, and how they navigate often-challenging interactions. I’m particularly interested in settings where people have conversations on behalf of institutions, and in analyzing conversations as a window into how these institutions work in practice. Drawing on techniques from natural language processing, computational social science, and causal inference, I examine large datasets containing conversation transcripts. Past and present work has considered settings such as political discourse, mental health counseling, and law enforcement. Additional Information What are some of your most interesting projects? How did you end up where you are today? What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? What are 1-3 interesting facts about yourself? Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: A Data Science Toolkit for Examining Local Governance I am an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer and Information Science at the University of Michigan-Dearborn, where I lead the Trustworthy AIoT Lab (TAI Lab). Before joining UM-Dearborn, I was a Postdoctoral Associate at Duke University. I obtained my Ph.D. degree in the Computer Science and Engineering at Michigan State University, my M.S. degree at Northwestern Polytechnical University and B.E. degree with honor at Taiyuan University of Technology. I completed my PhD within 5 years and I’ve kept my research topic since I was an undergraudate student who majored in IoT engineering. My current research interests are mobile computing, AIoT, Cyber Physical Systems, AI-assisted sensing/localization, and HCI. My previous work focused on exploring spatial-temporal diversities in Optical Wireless Communication (OWC) for its improved communication performance and enabled sensing/localization. My vision is that light can provide the secure and location-aware communication for Internet-of-Things and human-centered mobile computing. With explored OWC’s spatial-temporal diversities and machine learning, we can use light as promising medium for next-generation wireless networks with broad applications (e.g., LiFi, V2X networks, underwater navigation, digital health, smart city, HCI, and AR/VR). Some of my projects are detailed below. （1） HoloCube is an innovative optical wireless communication (OWC) system designed to enable 3D Internet of Things (IoT) connectivity using software-defined optical camera communication and the Pepper’s Ghost effect. Unlike conventional OWC systems that treat the transmitter as a point source, HoloCube employs virtual 3D hollow cubes with adaptive Spatial-Color Shift Keying (SCSK) modulation. These cubes maintain a consistent structure when viewed from different angles while dynamically embedding distinct data over time. The cube’s positioning elements provide dual references for 3D reconstruction (spatial) and robust color decoding (spectral). Experimental results demonstrate that HoloCube achieves reliable omnidirectional IoT connections with a goodput of 70 Kbps over a 4-meter range in real-world indoor settings, offering an efficient and secure solution for mobile IoT applications. (2) RoFin is an innovative system designed for real-time 3D hand pose reconstruction, leveraging six temporal-spatial 2D rolling fingertips for precise tracking of 20 hand joints. Unlike traditional vision-based approaches limited by low sampling rates (60 Hz), poor performance in low-light conditions, and restricted detection ranges, RoFin uses active optical labeling for finger identification and high rolling shutter rates (5-8 KHz) to enhance 3D location tracking. Implemented with wearable gloves featuring low-power LED nodes and commercial cameras, RoFin demonstrates significant advancements in human-computer interaction (HCI), including applications like multi-user interfaces and virtual writing for Parkinson’s patients. Experiments show RoFin achieves an 85% labeling accuracy at distances up to 2.5 meters, improves tracking granularity with 4× more sampled points per frame, and reconstructs hand poses with a mean deviation error of just 16 mm compared to Leap Motion. We’ve applied various ML models for our projects such as CycleGAN for underwater image denoising, omnidirectional localization, user ID identification, etc. The most significant scientific contribution I would like to make is in exploring light as a medium for ubiquitous wireless communication and sensing by utilizing AI and IoT technologies. I am working on analyzing the solar wind plasma measurements obtained by multiple space missions. Especially, I am interested in the solar wind heavy ion elemental abundance and charge states measured by SWICS on Ulysses and ACE and HIS onboard Solar Orbiter mission. Applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms on solar wind plasma classification and heliophysics parameter prediction are a brand new research area that we have been working on. Additional Information What are some of your most interesting projects? How did you end up where you are today? What is the most significant scientific contribution you would like to make? What makes you excited about your data science and AI research? What are 1-3 interesting facts about yourself? My research is focused on developing efficient and effective statistical and computational methods for genetic and genomic studies. These studies often involve large-scale and high-dimensional data; examples include genome-wide association studies, epigenome-wide association studies, and various functional genomic sequencing studies such as bulk and single cell RNAseq, bisulfite sequencing, ChIPseq, ATACseq etc. Our method development is often application oriented and specifically targeted for practical applications of these large-scale genetic and genomic studies, thus is not restricted in a particular methodology area. Our previous and current methods include, but are not limited to, Bayesian methods, mixed effects models, factor analysis models, sparse regression models, deep learning algorithms, clustering algorithms, integrative methods, spatial statistics, and efficient computational algorithms. By developing novel analytic methods, I seek to extract important information from these data and to advance our understanding of the genetic basis of phenotypic variation for various human diseases and disease related quantitative traits. A statistical method recently developed in our group aims to identify tissues that are relevant to diseases or disease related complex traits, through integrating tissue specific omics studies (e.g. ROADMAP project) with genome-wide association studies (GWASs). Heatmap displays the rank of 105 tissues (y-axis) in terms of their relevance for each of the 43 GWAS traits (x-axis) evaluated by our method. Traits are organized by hierarchical clustering. Tissues are organized into ten tissue groups . Accomplishments and Awards Five mid-career researchers receive Biosciences Initiative award For human-machine systems, I first collect data from human users, whether it’s an individual, a team, or even a society. Different kinds of methods can be used, including self-report, interview, focus groups, physiological and behavioral data, as well as user-generated data from the Internet. Based on the data collected, I attempt to understand human contexts, including different aspects of the human users, such as emotion, cognition, needs, preferences, locations and activities. Such understanding can then be applied to different human-machine systems, including healthcare systems, automated driving systems, and product-service systems. Based on the different design theory and methodology, from the perspective of the machine dimension, I apply knowledge of computing and communication as well as practical and theoretical knowledge of social and behavior to design various systems for human users. From the human dimension, I seek to understand human needs and decision making processes, and then build mathematical models and design tools that facilitate integration of subjective experiences, social contexts, and engineering principles into the design process of human-machine systems. With a passion for developing decision support systems that integrate cutting edge techniques from artificial intelligence, quantitative image analysis, computer vision, and multimodal biomedical data fusion. Research interests have been focusing on characterizing diseases abnormalities and predicting their likelihood of being significant, with the goal to enable early diagnosis and risk stratification, as well as aiding treatment decision making and monitoring. My main research activities address the fundamental challenges of machine learning when applied to real-world applications. My research theme is to develop generalizable, scalable, interpretable, and privacy-preserving approaches that can effectively mine insights from big data and validate and incorporate such insights in application domains, especially health informatics. My long-term research vision is to achieve Unified Knowledge Integration: enhancing health informatics using artificial intelligence to consolidate domain knowledge and the insights derived from large-scale, multimodal, and heterogeneous datasets and curated knowledge in foundation models. I am an associate professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Michigan-Dearborn, and I previously held an associate professorship at Kettering University, Michigan. Actively involved in professional communities such as IEEE and ECS, my research focuses on various aspects of battery technology, including design, manufacturing, and modeling for electric vehicles. I have received several awards for my work, including the Distinguished Research Team Award 2025 from UM-Dearborn, the Outstanding Teaching Award from Kettering University in 2020, the Outstanding New Research Award from Kettering University in 2016, and the 2014 Kettering Faculty Research Fellowship for my contributions to battery development for energy storage. My research leverages machine learning and predictive modeling to improve battery health monitoring, capacity estimation, and fault detection by utilizing historical and real-time data for accurate state-of-health (SOH) and state-of-charge (SOC) predictions. Additionally, by integrating advanced optical sensing technologies within batteries, I collect high-resolution data on temperature, strain, and chemical changes, which are then analyzed to gain deeper insights into battery formation processes and internal interactions. One of my prominent projects involves a Smart battery management system that uses optical sensing. This project aims to improve the manufacturing of lithium-ion batteries by using special optical sensors to monitor their internal processes in real-time. By embedding these sensors inside the batteries, we can observe how key components form and change, helping us make the batteries safer, more efficient, and longer-lasting. Ultimately, this could lead to faster and more cost-effective battery production, benefiting everything from electric cars to portable electronics. The most significant scientific contribution I would like to make is to revolutionize battery technology by developing intelligent battery management systems (BMS) that seamlessly integrate advanced sensing technologies, machine learning, and digital twin models. This would enable real-time monitoring, precise prediction of battery performance, and optimization of manufacturing processes. By embedding optical sensors within batteries and employing data-driven models, I aim to enhance battery safety, efficiency, and longevity while reducing production costs. Ultimately, I aspire to create a framework that can be widely adopted across industries, particularly in electric vehicles and energy storage systems, leading to safer, more efficient, and environmentally sustainable energy solutions. What excites me most about my data science and AI research is the ability to uncover hidden patterns and make intelligent predictions that directly impact the performance, safety, and sustainability of battery systems. The synergy between advanced sensing technologies, machine learning, and digital twin modeling offers unprecedented opportunities to gain real-time insights into battery health and performance. My research interests are in the areas of machine learning, statistical network analysis, analysis of high-dimensional data, and their applications in health sciences, biology, finance and marketing. Kai Zhu is interested in global change biology, ecological modeling, and environmental data science, where he enjoys integrating ecological theory with advanced tools in statistics and computer science. His current research focuses on plant and soil responses to environmental change in the coupled natural and human systems, spanning from meter-scale experiments to global-scale analyses. Recent projects include quantifying climate change impacts on forest geographic distribution and growth in North America; synthesizing a multi-factor global change experiment in California grassland; understanding soil fungi and tree mutualisms across geographical gradients in the United States; detecting land surface phenology change in Northern Hemisphere. Accomplishments and Awards 2023 Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) Grant Award: Bayesian modeling of multi-source phenology to forecast airborne allergen concentration Haojie Zhu’s research centers on identifying genetic and non-genetic biomarkers associated with the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of various therapeutic agents through an integrated multi-omics approach, including genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. He is also focused on utilizing these biomarkers to develop statistical and machine-learning models aimed at individualizing pharmacotherapy Dr. Zhu’s group conducts research on various topics, ranging from foundational methodologies to challenging applications, in data science. In particular, the group has been investigating the fundamental issues and techniques for supporting various types of queries (including range queries, box queries, k-NN queries, and hybrid queries) on large datasets in a non-ordered discrete data space. A number of novel indexing and searching techniques that utilize the unique characteristics of an NDDS are developed. The group has also been studying the issues and techniques for storing and searching large scale k-mer datasets for various genome sequence analysis applications in bioinformatics. A virtual approximate store approach to supporting repetitive big data in genome sequence analyses and several new sequence analysis techniques are suggested. In addition, the group has been researching the challenges and methods for processing and optimizing a new type of so-called progressive queries that are formulated on the fly by a user in multiple steps. Such queries are widely used in many application domains including e-commerce, social media, business intelligence, and decision support. The other research topics that have been studied by the group include streaming data processing, self-management database, spatio-temporal data indexing, data privacy, Web information management, and vehicle drive-through wireless services. My research focuses on the causes, dynamics and outcomes of conflict, at the international and local levels. My methodological areas of interest include spatial statistics, mathematical/computational modeling and text analysis. Map/time-series/network plot, showing the flow of information across battles in World War II. Z axis is time, X and Y axes are longitude and latitude, polygons are locations of battles, red lines are network edges linking battles involving the same combatants. Source: Until the Bitter End? The Diffusion of Surrender Across Battles I study the percolation model, which is the model for long-range connectivity formation in systems that include polymerization, flow in porous media, cell-phone signals, and the spread of diseases. I study this on random graphs and other networks, and on regular lattices in various dimensions, using computer simulation and analysis. We have also worked on developing new algorithms. I am currently applying these methods to studying the COVID-19 pandemic, which also requires comparison with some of the vast amount of data that is available from every part of the world. Paul Zimmerman, PhD, is Assistant Professor of Chemistry, College of Literature, Science, and the Arts, at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. The Zimmerman research group is a pioneer in computational chemical reaction discovery, and has developed algorithms which map out complex multi-component, multi-elementary step reaction mechanisms without reliance on prior chemical knowledge. These methods, being low computational cost compared to other quantum chemical techniques, provide a large amount of detailed and accurate chemical information to be processed and exploited. These data present an opportunity for application of statistical methods, specifically from machine learning, to determine the key chemical features that enable chemical reactions to occur. Machine learning not only provides a detailed analysis of how chemical processes work, but also provides a rapid, predictive method to determine the rate and selectivity of novel chemical reaction sequences. Ongoing work in the Zimmerman group is taking advantage of tools such as the Kernel Ridge and logistic regressions, k-nearest neighbors, and genetic algorithms to transform chemical reaction data into predictive tools applicable to many types of chemistry. Successful k-NN organization of reaction data involving nearly 700 unique chemical reactions. Sebastian Zöllner is a Professor of Biostatistics. He also holds an appointment in the Department of Psychiatry. Dr. Zöllner joined the University of Michigan after a postdoctoral fellowship in the Department of Human Genetics at the University of Chicago. His research effort is divided between generating new methods in statistical genetics and analyzing data. The general thrust of his work is problems from human genetics, evolutionary biology and statistical population biology. Critical infrastructure in the civilian, commercial, and military sectors can be harmed by space weather caused by highly variable solar and solar wind activities. Understanding the underlying physical processes of space weather, and improving our specification and forecasting, are required at the national level to protect vital assets on the ground and in space. One major space weather threat is ionospheric disturbances, which can lead to scintillations of the Global Navigation and Satellite Systems (GNSS) signals and disrupt radio operations. My group applies advanced statistical tools and machine learning methods to overcome the challenges of sparsely and irregularly sampled ionospheric data and to improve the specification and forecasting of local and global ionospheric disturbances and their variability. Our ongoing projects include: 1. Develope an innovative matrix completion method VISTA (Video Imputation with SoftImpute, Temporal smoothing and Auxiliary data) to reconstruct time series of ionospheric TEC maps with a large amount of missing values and preserve observed meso-scale structures. 2. Apply machine learning methods, such as LSTM and the modified U-Net model, to forecast ionospheric TEC maps hours and days ahead. 3. Use machine learning methods to forecast the ionospheric equatorial plasma bubbles, which the most severe ionospheric disturbance. My research explores consent in various facets of social computing and human-computer interaction. Most germane to MIDAS would be research into consent to personal data donation for AI model training, and more broadly approaches for participatory AI that directly involve AI-novice stakeholders in design and development of new AI-driven technologies.